privacy.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Our privacy policy
---

### The fine print

We love collaborating with you!

In order to work with you however, we need to know a few things about you. We collect only the bare minimum needed to interact with you: your name, phone number and email address. To ship refactoring cards and other merchandise to you. we need your address. When we run an on-site course we need to know where to show up and who will be in the course - a contact phone number will be handy as well. 

We will never give or sell your data in any form to other parties for marketing purposes.

Give us a shout if you'd like to update your details or have them removed.

### Cookies

Our website only uses cookies for enabling the Google Forms based contact form and for analytics ([Google Analytics](https://policies.google.com/technologies/partner-sites)), so that we can improve our website based on how it is used. The following cookies are used for the stated purposes:

<table class="cookie-table">
<tr><th class="cookie-table-cell">Cookie name</th><th class="cookie-table-cell">Purpose</th></tr>
<tr>
  <td class="cookie-table-cell">cookieconsent_status</td>
  <td class="cookie-table-cell">track your cookie consent status</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td class="cookie-table-cell">_ga<br>_gid<br>_gat_gtag_UA_175095301_1</td>
  <td class="cookie-table-cell">Google Analytics, collect page view statistics</td>
</tr>
</table>

### The finer print

The personal information we collect is used by the [partners in QWAN](/about) - _Piecemeal Growth_, _Westgeest Consultancy_ and _Living Software Ltd_ - only for the following purposes:

- coming to an agreement with you about projects and training courses,
- delivering projects and training courses for you,
- providing after-care once a project or training course has been finished,
- managing your participation in events we organize,
- handling your orders from our web shop,
- keeping you up to date about what we're up to - if you have granted us permission

We will not use your personal information for any other purpose.

Data we (possibly) need from you for the purposes stated above, consists of: name, affiliation, e-mail address, phone number, address, Twitter handle, bank account data

We use a number of third party services for storing the information. All services we use to deliver our services to you comply with the EU's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). 
We will not use your personal information for any other purpose than the ones stated above; we will not sell or transfer your personal information to any other third parties.

You are entitled to request the specific information we keep about you and to have us correct the information if needed. Just let us know by calling us or sending us a message through the [contact form](/#contact) or email us at info -at- qwan -dot- eu.

You are also entitled to have your personal information removed from our systems (except for information we are required to keep by law, like invoice which we need to keep for 7 years for tax purposes).

We will keep project & training related personal information up to 2 years after finishing a project, to provide proper after-care. We are required by law to keep contact information for invoicing & orders for 7 years. If you have granted us permission to keep you up to date, we will keep your contact information until you revoke the permission.

We will take care of your personal information by applying appropriate security measures, like password protection and encryption.

### Contact information

Please use our [contact form](/#contact) or email us at info -at- qwan -dot- eu.

Commit message:

updated privacy policy: added AFP & subprocessors

privacy.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Our privacy policy
---

### The fine print

We love collaborating with you!

In order to work with you however, we need to know a few things about you. We collect only the bare minimum needed to interact with you: your name, phone number and email address. To ship refactoring cards and other merchandise to you. we need your address. When we run an on-site course we need to know where to show up and who will be in the course - a contact phone number will be handy as well. 

We will never give or sell your data in any form to other parties for marketing purposes.

Give us a shout if you'd like to update your details or have them removed.

### Cookies

Our website only uses cookies for enabling the Google Forms based contact form and for analytics ([Google Analytics](https://policies.google.com/technologies/partner-sites)), so that we can improve our website based on how it is used. The following cookies are used for the stated purposes:

<table class="cookie-table">
<tr><th class="cookie-table-cell">Cookie name</th><th class="cookie-table-cell">Purpose</th></tr>
<tr>
  <td class="cookie-table-cell">cookieconsent_status</td>
  <td class="cookie-table-cell">track your cookie consent status</td>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td class="cookie-table-cell">_ga<br>_gid<br>_gat_gtag_UA_175095301_1</td>
  <td class="cookie-table-cell">Google Analytics, collect page view statistics</td>
</tr>
</table>

### The finer print

The personal information we collect is used by the [partners in QWAN](/about) - _Piecemeal Growth_, _Westgeest Consultancy_ and _Living Software Ltd_ - only for the following purposes - depending on what services you use from us:

- coming to an agreement with you about projects and training courses;
- delivering projects, training courses, and workshops for you;
- providing after-care once a project or training course has been finished;
- managing your participation in events we organize;
- handling your orders from our web shop;
- enabling you to use the Online Agile Fluency Diagnostic software;
- keeping you up to date about what we're up to - if you have granted us permission.

Data we (possibly) need from you for the purposes stated above, consists of: name, affiliation, e-mail address, phone number, address, Twitter handle, bank account data

We will not use your personal information for any other purpose than the ones stated above; we will not sell or transfer your personal information to any other third parties.

We use a number of third party services for storing and processing the information. All services we use comply with the EU's General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR):
- Amazon Web Services EMEA SARL, 38 Avenue John F. Kennedy, L-1855, Luxembourg
- Google Cloud EMEA Limited, 70 Sir John Rogerson’s Quay, Dublin 2, Ireland

You are entitled to request the specific information we keep about you and to have us correct the information if needed. Just let us know by calling us or sending us a message through the [contact form](/#contact) or email us at info -at- qwan -dot- eu.

You are also entitled to have your personal information removed from our systems (except for information we are required to keep by law, like invoice which we need to keep for 7 years for tax purposes).

We will keep project & training related personal information up to 2 years after finishing a project, to provide proper after-care. We are required by law to keep contact information for invoicing & orders for 7 years. If you have granted us permission to keep you up to date, we will keep your contact information until you revoke the permission.

We will take care of your personal information by applying appropriate security measures, like password protection and encryption.

### Contact information

Please use our [contact form](/#contact) or email us at info -at- qwan -dot- eu.

*Updated: January 14th, 2023*
