_training/ddd-introduction.md, before:

---
title: Introduction to Domain Driven Design
layout: training-description
summary: 'tackling software complexity'
tags: [modelling, domain driven design, architecture, event storming]
---

When developing software, we sometimes tend to play down problems to create
simple solutions. In practice, things over time turn out not to be as simple as
assumed. The domain is usually way more complicated than anticipated. Security
constraints tend to impact on the design, etc.

Domain-driven design (DDD) is an approach to software development for complex
needs by connecting the architecture and implementation to an evolving model of
the problem domain. It can be applied as an agile approach to software
development whilst recognising complexity.

Working from your domain using DDD patterns and practices will guide your architecture and component decisions. This will help you develop higher quality
software products that will be better maintainable in the long run. 

## Goal

Get an overview of Domain Driven Design and learn the basic concepts and modelling
patterns and practices like subdomains, bounded contexts, aggregates, context mapping, and event storming.

After this workshop, you will be able to:
- explain what DDD is and what it is not;
- use event storming to facilitate a domain modelling session;
- explain patterns like subdomains, bounded contexts and aggregates and what they are intended for;
- create a context map based on the outcome of an event storming session;
- evaluate context boundaries using heuristics.

## Means

We introduce Domain Driven Design as an approach to modelling and application
architecture. We will guide you through the different techniques and patterns
with lively, hands-on collaborative modelling exercises. 

This workshop focuses on the domain modelling aspect of DDD. Implementation and
coding aspects are covered by the [Implementing Domain Driven Design workshop](/training/implementing-ddd).

## Outline

- presentation: Domain Driven Design - what & why
- create a domain model collaboratively using event storming
- find subdomains
- identify bounded contexts & create a context map
- do systems design with event storming: commands, policies, read models
- find aggregates using heuristics

## Audience & prerequisites

Software developers, testers, analysts, architects, product owners, agile
coaches; this workshop is suitable both for more junior participants who want to
grow and for more senior participants who'd like to sharpen their modelling
skills.

Having at least a year of experience in a software development environment is
recommended.

## Practical information

* Duration: 1 or 2 days
* No laptops required

[Please contact us for registration](/contact)

Commit message:

add tagline to course pages; sync summary with summary on index page

_training/ddd-introduction.md, after:

---
title: Introduction to Domain Driven Design
layout: training-description
tagline: "Making sense of software complexity"
summary: "Domain-driven design is an approach to software development for complex needs by connecting the architecture and implementation to an evolving model of the problem domain. It enables an agile approach to complex software development by putting the domain model central."
tags: [modelling, domain driven design, architecture, event storming]
---

When developing software, we sometimes tend to play down problems to create
simple solutions. In practice, things over time turn out not to be as simple as
assumed. The domain is usually way more complicated than anticipated. Security
constraints tend to impact on the design, etc.

Domain-driven design (DDD) is an approach to software development for complex
needs by connecting the architecture and implementation to an evolving model of
the problem domain. It can be applied as an agile approach to software
development whilst recognising complexity.

Working from your domain using DDD patterns and practices will guide your architecture and component decisions. This will help you develop higher quality
software products that will be better maintainable in the long run. 

## Goal

Get an overview of Domain Driven Design and learn the basic concepts and modelling
patterns and practices like subdomains, bounded contexts, aggregates, context mapping, and event storming.

After this workshop, you will be able to:
- explain what DDD is and what it is not;
- use event storming to facilitate a domain modelling session;
- explain patterns like subdomains, bounded contexts and aggregates and what they are intended for;
- create a context map based on the outcome of an event storming session;
- evaluate context boundaries using heuristics.

## Means

We introduce Domain Driven Design as an approach to modelling and application
architecture. We will guide you through the different techniques and patterns
with lively, hands-on collaborative modelling exercises. 

This workshop focuses on the domain modelling aspect of DDD. Implementation and
coding aspects are covered by the [Implementing Domain Driven Design workshop](/training/implementing-ddd).

## Outline

- presentation: Domain Driven Design - what & why
- create a domain model collaboratively using event storming
- find subdomains
- identify bounded contexts & create a context map
- do systems design with event storming: commands, policies, read models
- find aggregates using heuristics

## Audience & prerequisites

Software developers, testers, analysts, architects, product owners, agile
coaches; this workshop is suitable both for more junior participants who want to
grow and for more senior participants who'd like to sharpen their modelling
skills.

Having at least a year of experience in a software development environment is
recommended.

## Practical information

* Duration: 1 or 2 days
* No laptops required

[Please contact us for registration](/contact)
