_training/example-mapping.md, before:

---
title: Example Mapping Workshop
layout: training-description
summary: 'Spice up your refinement sessions.'
tags: [refinement, agile planning, user stories, specification by example, behaviour driven development, BDD]
---

Do you have long, boring refinement sessions? Do you still run into big surprises and lack of shared understanding when building the software?

In this hands on workshop, we introduce you to Example Mapping, a simple
workshop format that brings focus to your refinements. It will get you faster to
a shared understanding, surface big unknowns earlier, and make the process much
more enjoyable. 

Example Mapping is a simple, pen-and-paper technique invented by Matt Wynne (of
Cucumber fame), which helps to have a more focused, structured conversation
about your user stories.

## Goal

Learn Example Mapping as a whole-team refinement technique

## Means

We start out with a little bit of theory and then quickly get to a hands-on
group exercise, applying Example Mapping to a case we bring in. There is
sufficient room for reflection, discussion and questions.

We will also show how the examples that come out of the workshop can be
transformed into automated tests.

## Audience & prerequisites

This workshop is for developers, product owners, scrum masters, agile coaches,
testers

Some experience working in an agile team is required.

## Practical information

* Duration: 1/2 day
* No laptops required
* This training is available in-house only.

Commit message:

add tagline to course pages; sync summary with summary on index page

_training/example-mapping.md, after:

---
title: Example Mapping Workshop
layout: training-description
tagline: "Spice up your refinement sessions"
summary: "Do you have long, boring refinement sessions? Do you still run into surprises and lack of shared understanding when building the software? In this hands-on workshop, you will experience Example Mapping, a simple pen-and-paper technique to spice up your refinements."
tags: [refinement, agile planning, user stories, specification by example, behaviour driven development, BDD]
---

Do you have long, boring refinement sessions? Do you still run into big surprises and lack of shared understanding when building the software?

In this hands on workshop, we introduce you to Example Mapping, a simple
workshop format that brings focus to your refinements. It will get you faster to
a shared understanding, surface big unknowns earlier, and make the process much
more enjoyable. 

Example Mapping is a simple, pen-and-paper technique invented by Matt Wynne (of
Cucumber fame), which helps to have a more focused, structured conversation
about your user stories.

## Goal

Learn Example Mapping as a whole-team refinement technique

## Means

We start out with a little bit of theory and then quickly get to a hands-on
group exercise, applying Example Mapping to a case we bring in. There is
sufficient room for reflection, discussion and questions.

We will also show how the examples that come out of the workshop can be
transformed into automated tests.

## Audience & prerequisites

This workshop is for developers, product owners, scrum masters, agile coaches,
testers

Some experience working in an agile team is required.

## Practical information

* Duration: 1/2 day
* No laptops required
* This training is available in-house only.
