_training/user-story-mapping-dimensional-planning.md, before:

---
title: User Story Mapping & Dimensional Planning
layout: training-description
summary: 'Making more effective product decisions'
tags: [refinement, agile planning, user stories, specification by example, behaviour driven development, BDD, predictability]
---

Managing your product backlog as an ordered list of user stories is a challenge. The customer wants it all, but this takes too long!

User Story Mapping and Dimensional Planning are two pragmatic techniques for
management your product development and for planning releases, to find the
greatest value for the least effort.

With these techniques, you will have more grip on your development efforts. You
are better able to know how far you are, enabling you to steer early towards
delivering more value sooner.

## Goal

Learn User Story Mapping and Dimensional Planning as agile planning and steering
techniques

## Means

We start out with a bit of theory and then quickly get to hands-on group
exercises. We will apply user story mapping by applying it on a case we bring
in. After the user story mapping exercise, we will do a hands on exercise with
dimensional planning, finding valuable releases based on the story maps the
groups created earlier.

There is sufficient room for reflection, discussion and questions.

## Audience & Prerequisites

This workshop is for developers, product owners, scrum masters, agile coaches,
testers

Some experience working in an agile team is required.

## Practical information

* Duration: 1 day
* No laptops required
* This training is available in-house only.

Commit message:

add tagline to course pages; sync summary with summary on index page

_training/user-story-mapping-dimensional-planning.md, after:

---
title: User Story Mapping & Dimensional Planning
layout: training-description
tagline: "More effective product decisions"
summary: "Managing your product backlog as an ordered list of user stories is a challenge. Your customer wants it all, but it takes too long!
    User Story Mapping and Dimensional Planning are two pragmatic product management techniques for realizing more value sooner."
tags: [refinement, agile planning, user stories, specification by example, behaviour driven development, BDD, predictability]
---

Managing your product backlog as an ordered list of user stories is a challenge. The customer wants it all, but this takes too long!

User Story Mapping and Dimensional Planning are two pragmatic techniques for
management your product development and for planning releases, to find the
greatest value for the least effort.

With these techniques, you will have more grip on your development efforts. You
are better able to know how far you are, enabling you to steer early towards
delivering more value sooner.

## Goal

Learn User Story Mapping and Dimensional Planning as agile planning and steering
techniques

## Means

We start out with a bit of theory and then quickly get to hands-on group
exercises. We will apply user story mapping by applying it on a case we bring
in. After the user story mapping exercise, we will do a hands on exercise with
dimensional planning, finding valuable releases based on the story maps the
groups created earlier.

There is sufficient room for reflection, discussion and questions.

## Audience & Prerequisites

This workshop is for developers, product owners, scrum masters, agile coaches,
testers

Some experience working in an agile team is required.

## Practical information

* Duration: 1 day
* No laptops required
* This training is available in-house only.
