_training/value-stream-mapping.md, before:

---
title: Map your Delivery Value Stream for Fun and Profit
layout: training-description
summary: 'Map the delivery value stream, from concept to cash; find friction and waste in your whole delivery process and find ways to deliver better software faster'
tags: [CI/CD, continuous integration, continuous delivery, lean software development, friction, retrospectives, systems thinking, sensemaking, organizational change, engineering culture]
---

In this hands-on workshop, you will visualize your whole delivery process, from concept to cash. By doing so, you will discover sources of friction and waste that is slowing you down. You will also discover the impact of large work batches and long feedback loops and how these eat away your valuable time. You will get a feel for what the bottlenecks are in your way of working.

You can run this workshop focused on a specific product. We recommend bringing in not just the development team, but also product management, product owners, UX, and support. When all involved roles join the value stream mapping workshop, we often find effective improvements beyond the development part.

It is also possible to run this workshop across multiple teams, especially when your propositions involve multiple teams. The workshop helps you to zoom out and see friction, waste and bottlenecks that emerge from the collaboration.

## Benefits

By participating in this workshop, you will:

* learn how to run a value stream mapping workshop
* know the 7 wastes in development and how to recognise them
* be able to visualize feedback loops in the delivery process and explain what their impact is
*... and have fun!* – we take pride in creating a fun and effective learning environment, mixing presentations with exercises and hands-on development.

## Practical information

* Duration: 1/2 day
* This workshop is delivered in-house

[Please contact us for registration](/contact)

Commit message:

add tagline to course pages; sync summary with summary on index page

_training/value-stream-mapping.md, after:

---
title: Map your Delivery Value Stream for Fun and Profit
layout: training-description
tagline: "Reduce waste and friction by taking a systems view"
summary: "In this hands-on workshop, you will visualize your whole delivery process, from concept to cash. By doing so, you will discover sources of friction and waste that is slowing you down. You will also discover the impact of large work batches and long feedback loops and how these eat away your valuable time. You will get a feel for what the bottlenecks are in your way of working."
tags: [CI/CD, continuous integration, continuous delivery, lean software development, friction, retrospectives, systems thinking, sensemaking, organizational change, engineering culture]
---

In this hands-on workshop, you will visualize your whole delivery process, from concept to cash. By doing so, you will discover sources of friction and waste that is slowing you down. You will also discover the impact of large work batches and long feedback loops and how these eat away your valuable time. You will get a feel for what the bottlenecks are in your way of working.

You can run this workshop focused on a specific product. We recommend bringing in not just the development team, but also product management, product owners, UX, and support. When all involved roles join the value stream mapping workshop, we often find effective improvements beyond the development part.

It is also possible to run this workshop across multiple teams, especially when your propositions involve multiple teams. The workshop helps you to zoom out and see friction, waste and bottlenecks that emerge from the collaboration.

## Benefits

By participating in this workshop, you will:

* learn how to run a value stream mapping workshop
* know the 7 wastes in development and how to recognise them
* be able to visualize feedback loops in the delivery process and explain what their impact is
*... and have fun!* – we take pride in creating a fun and effective learning environment, mixing presentations with exercises and hands-on development.

## Practical information

* Duration: 1/2 day
* This workshop is delivered in-house

[Please contact us for registration](/contact)
