---
layout: post
title: Paying the price of fast(er) tests
tags:
  - productivity
  - continuous delivery
  - systems thinking
  - test driven development
author: Marc Evers
image: /attachments/blogposts/2020/fast-test-effects-1.jpg
---

We are fans of Test Driven Development (TDD). It has served us well over the
years. The TDD cycle - test, fail, run, refactor - is all about getting rich
feedback fast, feedback about design decisions, about the test, about your code.
We thrive on fast tests. We also want to test-drive our adapter integration and
UI tests. These tend to be slow and fragile with low quality feedback, so we try
to keep these minimal.

There are some recent developments where slow types of tests have become an
order of magnitude faster, for instance testing [Vue.js](https://vuejs.org)
components and [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/) based web end-to-end tests.
[Karma](https://karma-runner.github.io/) based tests also come to mind, which
are neither unit tests (because they run in a browser) nor end-to-end tests
(because they have no back-end). This order of magnitude speed-up changes the
whole game, but not only for the better. In this post we will dive into the
effects of having fast(er) tests.

## Fast Vue.js components tests

Vue components are easy to test using [Vue test
utils](https://vue-test-utils.vuejs.org/). Even though its API is a bit low
level, you can wrap it in your own DSL. These tests run blazingly fast together
with the unit tests, in seconds. In the [online Agile FluencyÂ® Diagnostic
application](/2020/09/25/hexagonal-frontend-example.html) we are developing, we
currently have over 170 UI component tests that run in less that 4 seconds.

Having fast tests facilitates defect prevention and learning by providing
immediate feedback on our actions. This contributes to code quality, product
quality and speed of development. In other words, these help your
[productivity](/2020/10/26/under-pressure.html#productivity) like this diagram
of effects shows:

![beneficial effects of fast tests](/attachments/blogposts/2020/fast-test-effects-1.jpg)

> The post-its represent _variables_ - things we can observe or measure. A black arrow indicates an effect in the same direction: if _speed of
feedback_ goes up, _amount of learning_ also goes up. A red arrow with a '-'
indicates an opposite effect: the more _mistakes_ we make, the lower the _code
quality_. The || on an arrow means the effect has a delay.

**So fast UI tests are great ... but they can have unintended consequences and
nudge you towards less optimal design decisions.**

When testing UI components is difficult and slow, we move the logic out, into
classes/functions of their own with their own tests. It is just too much a
hassle to test everything in UI component tests. Separating the concerns allows
fast tests for most of the code.

Because with Vue.js component tests are so fast, it is tempting to add logic to
components and cover the logic in UI component tests. Test slowness is no longer
an impediment to prevent this. The consequence is however that we mix UI and
logic, and UI components grow more and more complicated. The tests will need to
cover all the different concerns, so their scope grows. The wider the scope of a
test, the harder the test becomes to understand and the less helpful its
feedback will be.

We start losing time on figuring out failing tests. By mixing UI integration and
view logic, we start introducing defects because things are getting complicated.
There are too many paths to cover in tests and it takes us a long time to
understand what the code and tests are doing.

![negative effects of fast tests](/attachments/blogposts/2020/fast-test-effects-2.jpg)

Ultimately, the number of mistakes starts rising, reducing code quality and
slowing down development. It starts balancing out the positive effects of fast
tests, and we risk becoming less productive eventually.

If we are aware of this, we can consciously decide to put view logic in its own
classes and functions. Even for us the temptation remains, sometimes an innocent
`if` or a tiny bit of logic creeps into our UI components. This 'little bit of
code' acts as an attractor to even more code and complexity starts growing.
Fortunately, we know how to refactor ourselves out of that corner.

We are not saying that Vue component testing is bad. On the contrary, having UI
component tests running in milliseconds is great. But it also removes an
impediment that prevents us making UI code too complicated. It happens before
you know it, but as long as we are aware of this, we can act upon it. **So keep
listening to your tests.** 

## Fast Cypress end-to-end tests

We see something similar with [Cypress](https://cypress.io), a recent web
testing tool that also changes the game by being an order of magnitude faster.
[We wrote about this earlier](/2020/10/23/cypress-first-impressions.html). The
Cypress developers made different trade-offs than e.g. Selenium/WebDriver, by
having the test run in the browser next to the web application code.

Cypress tests run very fast and stable. They provide good quality feedback, for
instance by records the DOM state at each step allowing you to see the path that
lead to a test failure. This enables us to quickly write UI tests. Cypress
facilitates stubbing back-end calls conveniently, so we tend to write component
end-to-end tests, with tests having the whole front end component as their
scope.

This is very powerful for instance for getting an existing front end under test.
If we mostly write end-to-end tests however, we move a way from focused unit and
adapter-integration tests. This will not help in keeping our front end code
well-structured and loosely coupled, like we described in earlier posts on [How
to keep Front End complexity in check with Hexagonal
Architecture](/2020/09/09/how-to-keep-complexity-in-check-with-hexagonal-architecture.html)
and [A Hexagonal Vue.js front-end, by
example](/2020/09/25/hexagonal-frontend-example.html).

Every component starts simple, but it will grow over time. Covering all the
different paths, covering combinations of UI state, view logic, back-end API
integration through UI based end-to-end tests becomes cumbersome. Getting high
coverage eventually becomes impossible.

As long as we are aware of these effects, we can [consciously decide on the test
architecture](/2020/09/17/test-architecture.html) for front end components,
and have a suitable mix of unit tests, adapter integration tests and end-to-end
tests. Again, we have to be conscious about this, because the slowness of
writing and running UI tests is no longer an impediment that keeps us from doing
too much in end-to-end tests.

## Conclusions

Like Willem said in an [earlier post](/2020/10/23/cypress-first-impressions.html), **changing the speed at which something runs by an order of magnitude is a game changer**.

As our game changes, we need to stay aware of what other effects the change has.
In what directions will our tooling nudge us if we don't pay enough attention?
As long as we make conscious decisions, we can keep playing the game to our
advantage.

In UI components, we tend to be strict and move any view logic to its own
classes and functions. Keeping concerns separated helps to keep the component's
complexity manageable. 

The effects we mentioned are not the fault of Vue.js or Cypress. This post is by
no means a critique on the approach these tools take. We are actually quite
happy with technology that facilitates rapid feedback! As a developer, it pays
to understand the effects of these game changers, so that you can use them
to your advantage.

## References

A Diagram of Effects is a powerful technique to make sense of what is going on
in a team or an organization. We recommend Gerald M. Weinberg's [Quality
Software Management series](http://geraldmweinberg.com/Site/QSM_vol_1.html) if
you'd like to learn more, or read our whitepaper [Promise is
Debt](/attachments/ebooks/qwan-systems-book.pdf) (PDF).

_Credits: thanks to Willem for editing and helping improve this post._

<aside>
  <h3>Rightsize your automated tests</h3>
  <p>Getting a good mix of automated tests and making appropriate trade-offs can be a challenge. We can support you with workshops, architecture and code reviews, or working in your teams.</p>
  <p><div>
    <a href="/consulting">Learn more about our consultancy services</a>
  </div></p>
</aside>
