training/agile-engineering.md, before:

---
title: Agile Engineering (2 or 3 days)
layout: other
---
When you have learned the basics of agile software development, you might wonder how to actually get things done and get your software out of the door when you go agile. Scrum focuses on coordination and feedback practices, adding technical practices allows teams to grow systems with confidence and safety.

This intensive, hands on course focuses on the down to earth side of working in an agile way: how to plan, build, test, and deploy the software. How to get it done using user stories, test driven development, automated testing, incremental design, relentless refactoring, pair programming, and continuous integration.

This Agile Engineering course is also an excellent way to prepare for the Scrum.org Professional Scrum Developer 1 assessment.

### Benefits

By participating in course, you will:

* learn how to deliver projects on-time and within budget, without compromising on quality
* see the value of eXtreme Programming principles and practices and how Scrum and eXtreme Programming are complementary
* understand how agile values, principles and practices relate
* learn how practices like test driven development, relentless refactoring, incremental design, continuous integration, and pair programming support agile principles and enable to deliver quality software incrementally and how they help to keep on delivering quality software over time
* learn how one can let quality software evolve iteratively and incrementally
* experience the role of testing and test driven development in agile development
* experience how all the different practices work together, through a real mini project
* **... and you’ll have fun!** We take pride in creating a fun and effective learning environment, mixing presentations with simulations, exercises and hands-on development.

### Topics

eXtreme Programming – values, principles &amp; practices; user stories &amp; specification by example; test driven development &amp; merciless refactoring; 
agile architecture &amp; incremental design; responsibility drivend design and CRC cards; bringing it all together, in a 3 iteration micro project

Commit message:

added summary & tags to training pages, for HTML meta data

training/agile-engineering.md, after:

---
title: Agile Engineering (2 or 3 days)
layout: other
summary: Agile/Scrum provides great focus on delivering in short cycles. To keep on delivering quality software with confidence, you need to master agile engineering principles & practices.
tags: [agile engineering, extreme programming, test driven development, refactoring, unit testing, scrum developer, ci/cd, continuous integration, continuous delivery]
---
When you have learned the basics of agile software development, you might wonder how to actually get things done and get your software out of the door when you go agile. Scrum focuses on coordination and feedback practices, adding technical practices allows teams to grow systems with confidence and safety.

This intensive, hands on course focuses on the down to earth side of working in an agile way: how to plan, build, test, and deploy the software. How to get it done using user stories, test driven development, automated testing, incremental design, relentless refactoring, pair programming, and continuous integration.

This Agile Engineering course is also an excellent way to prepare for the Scrum.org Professional Scrum Developer 1 assessment.

### Benefits

By participating in course, you will:

* learn how to deliver projects on-time and within budget, without compromising on quality
* see the value of eXtreme Programming principles and practices and how Scrum and eXtreme Programming are complementary
* understand how agile values, principles and practices relate
* learn how practices like test driven development, relentless refactoring, incremental design, continuous integration, and pair programming support agile principles and enable to deliver quality software incrementally and how they help to keep on delivering quality software over time
* learn how one can let quality software evolve iteratively and incrementally
* experience the role of testing and test driven development in agile development
* experience how all the different practices work together, through a real mini project
* **... and you’ll have fun!** We take pride in creating a fun and effective learning environment, mixing presentations with simulations, exercises and hands-on development.

### Topics

eXtreme Programming – values, principles &amp; practices; user stories &amp; specification by example; test driven development &amp; merciless refactoring; 
agile architecture &amp; incremental design; responsibility drivend design and CRC cards; bringing it all together, in a 3 iteration micro project
