training/mastering-legacy-code.md, before:

---
title:  Mastering Legacy Code (2 days)
layout: other
---

In this two day training course, you will learn how to improve the
design of software step by step, while continuing to deliver value to
your customers.

Everyone wants software that ‘just works’, that is a joy to maintain,
and where you can add new features easily. In practice however, there
are always bugs to fix and customers to please. Corners are cut and
design debt accumulates, ultimately resulting in *legacy code* – code
without tests.

You would like to improve the software piecemeal using *refactoring*-
which means improving the design of existing code without changing its
behaviour. There is a Catch-22 here: to refactor safely, you need
automated tests to ensure the code behaves the same as before. To add
tests, you first have to make it modular by refactoring.

There still is hope! Through presentations, demonstrations, exercises,
and a representative case, you will learn to identify smells, break
dependencies, refactor, and add tests in messy legacy code, so that you
can add new features with more ease and confidence.

The techniques taught in this course are also useful in *greenfield*
projects, to prevent the software from turning into legacy code. They
help you to recover quickly from mistakes and learn from them.

This course helps you get started and offers effective practices and
courage to persevere.

### Benefits

If you participate in this course, you will:

* apply a number of techniques to break unwanted dependencies in code
* know how to start making changes and adding tests simply responsibly
* be able to find *seams* in code and use them to break dependencies
* understand the system dynamics of design debt
* experience prioritizing, planning, and executing a large refactoring in small steps with a team, on real, representative legacy code.
* _...and have fun!_  - we take pride in creating a fun and effective learning
 environment, mixing presentations with exercises and hands-development.

### Topics

The first day is introductory, with an overview of refactorings, code
 smells, and how to break dependencies by finding seams in the code. We
 will do this through a mix of presentations, demonstrations and small
 exercises. You will also learn about the systemic causes and effects of
 design debt and how refactoring in small steps can help you break out of
 a vicious cycle.

Day two is the hands-on day. In two parts we will plan and execute a
 large refactoring on a real-world legacy system. Participants are
 coached in applying what they have learnt: working on a large, messy
 legacy code base without getting lost, using the vocabulary of smells,
 refactorings, seams, and dependencies to co-ordinate, plan and execute a
 large refactoring with a team. And do so safely, even though in the
 beginning no automated tests are present.

Commit message:

added summary & tags to training pages, for HTML meta data

training/mastering-legacy-code.md, after:

---
title:  Mastering Legacy Code (2 days)
layout: other
summary: "We all know 'em: those areas in your code base that need quite some courage to work on. Join us & learn techniques to make changes in these areas with confidence. "
tags: [legacy code, working effectively with legacy code, agile engineering, extreme programming, test driven development, refactoring, code smells, unit testing]
---

In this two day training course, you will learn how to improve the
design of software step by step, while continuing to deliver value to
your customers.

Everyone wants software that ‘just works’, that is a joy to maintain,
and where you can add new features easily. In practice however, there
are always bugs to fix and customers to please. Corners are cut and
design debt accumulates, ultimately resulting in *legacy code* – code
without tests.

You would like to improve the software piecemeal using *refactoring*-
which means improving the design of existing code without changing its
behaviour. There is a Catch-22 here: to refactor safely, you need
automated tests to ensure the code behaves the same as before. To add
tests, you first have to make it modular by refactoring.

There still is hope! Through presentations, demonstrations, exercises,
and a representative case, you will learn to identify smells, break
dependencies, refactor, and add tests in messy legacy code, so that you
can add new features with more ease and confidence.

The techniques taught in this course are also useful in *greenfield*
projects, to prevent the software from turning into legacy code. They
help you to recover quickly from mistakes and learn from them.

This course helps you get started and offers effective practices and
courage to persevere.

### Benefits

If you participate in this course, you will:

* apply a number of techniques to break unwanted dependencies in code
* know how to start making changes and adding tests simply responsibly
* be able to find *seams* in code and use them to break dependencies
* understand the system dynamics of design debt
* experience prioritizing, planning, and executing a large refactoring in small steps with a team, on real, representative legacy code.
* _...and have fun!_  - we take pride in creating a fun and effective learning
 environment, mixing presentations with exercises and hands-development.

### Topics

The first day is introductory, with an overview of refactorings, code
 smells, and how to break dependencies by finding seams in the code. We
 will do this through a mix of presentations, demonstrations and small
 exercises. You will also learn about the systemic causes and effects of
 design debt and how refactoring in small steps can help you break out of
 a vicious cycle.

Day two is the hands-on day. In two parts we will plan and execute a
 large refactoring on a real-world legacy system. Participants are
 coached in applying what they have learnt: working on a large, messy
 legacy code base without getting lost, using the vocabulary of smells,
 refactorings, seams, and dependencies to co-ordinate, plan and execute a
 large refactoring with a team. And do so safely, even though in the
 beginning no automated tests are present.
