---
layout: post
title: A short tribute to Christopher Alexander (1936-2022)
tags:
  - patterns
author: Marc Evers
image: 
---

Last week, [Christopher
Alexander](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christopher_Alexander) passed away at
the age of 85. Alexander was an architect with profound new ideas on habitable
architecture. His ideas have had an even more profound influence on software
development: he inspired the patterns movement in software in the 90s, and
indirectly influenced the rise of agile software development, which grew out of
the patterns movement.

Alexander's ideas and work has also been a great source of inspiration and
influence for me for the last 25 years, ever since I discovered his work.

In the mid 90s, Willem and I were studying Computer Science at the University of
Twente. We learned about design patterns there, while working as a student
assistant. We were fascinated by this new concept, although we were
also struggling how to apply patterns effectively.

We started digging into the sources of the design pattern concept, which was
inspired by Alexander's Pattern Language. I wanted to learn more! In the
university library I found copies of [The Timeless Way of
Building](https://www.amazon.com/Timeless-Way-Building-Christopher-Alexander/dp/0195024028)
and [Notes on the Synthesis of
Form](https://www.amazon.com/Notes-Synthesis-Form-Harvard-Paperbacks/dp/0674627512). 

Reading the Timeless Way of Building was a profound experience, life-changing I
can say. It is a wonderful book to read, well written, with wonderful, timeless
black-and-white photos. The philosophy Alexander wrote about touched me,
although at that time I could not yet fully grasp it. But I was hooked! The book
introduced the idea of "quality without a name" - the quality that we feel, that
we know that is there in a place, but we cannot put this quality in words,
because words like 'beautiful' do not fully capture it.

In the years that followed, I got my own copies of The Timeless Way, A Pattern
Language and Notes on the Synthesis of Form. I also devoured Richard P.
Gabriel's ["Patterns of Software - Tales from the Software
Community"](https://www.amazon.com/Patterns-Software-Tales-Community/dp/0195121236)
book (freely available [from Gabriel's
site](https://www.dreamsongs.com/Files/PatternsOfSoftware.pdf))

Next, I also got my hands on the beautiful [A Foreshadowing of 21st Century
Art](http://www.patternlanguage.com/bookstore/foreshadowing-of-21st-century-art.html)
book (aka the Turkish rugs book) which unfortunately is hard to get hold of
nowadays.

Another seminal book that builds on Alexander's work is [Stewart
Brand](https://twitter.com/stewartbrand)'s [How Buildings
Learn](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_Buildings_Learn), a beautiful book,
again a joy to read, about how buildings evolve over time. Most change takes
place _after_ a building is initially built, and there are several shearing
layers of change within a building, each moving at its own pace.

These books and their ideas have had a significant influence on how I developed myself and how I developed my view and approach on software development.

When I started my own company in the mid-2000s, I was looking for a name that
fit my perspective on software development and growing development
organizations. Having the initial candidate name rejected by the chamber of
commerce, I turned to the Timeless Way for inspiration (re-reading it brings joy
every time). I picked 'Piecemeal Growth' as the name for my company. 

Alexander's idea of Piecemeal Growth referred to the continuous process by which
buildings, neighborhoods, cities develop. Habitable places don't come from some
grand design, but rather from a continuous process of building and 'repairing'
any misfits that come to the surface. Complex systems are not designed, but they
grow iteratively and incrementally, continuously. This also holds for software
development and the way teams and organizations develop grow. They all evolve,
they grow piecemeal.

A few years later, Willem, Rob and I decided to join forces and start working
under a common label. Again we turned to our shared source of inspiration -
Christopher Alexander. We took up the name 'QWAN - Quality Without a Name', a
kind of aspirational goal for us, a thing we are looking within software
development for together with our clients. 

Last week, I finally got round to start reading Alexander's latest seminal work,
The Nature of Order. This is another profound work, laying down a new view on
how we look at order and life. The 4 volumes had been standing on my bookshelf
for quite some time, but I hadn't yet found the time to read it. Last week, I
finally started in volume 1.

Sadly, last week, Alexander passed away. I appreciate his contributions to
our field, and the influence he had on me. With QWAN, we will keep applying and
teaching his ideas, and keep his name alive.

# References

The idea of [Piecemeal Growth](http://www.laputan.org/mud/mud.html#PiecemealGrowth) is also explained in the [Big Ball of Mud](http://www.laputan.org/mud/mud.html) post by Brian Foote and Joseph Yoder

