---
layout: post
title: The subtle art of non intervention
tags:
  - productivity
  - agile fluency
  - feedback
  - systems thinking
author: Marc Evers
image: 
---

Being a consultant, working in roles of trusted advisor, facilitator, scrum
master, coach, mentor has taught me the subtle art of not intervening.

Not doing an intervention is a powerful intervention. Being conscious of this
helps wielding the power towards the good. As process minded people I and many
other agile people tend to **do** things, help teams, talk to individuals, lead
a group through a process. Especially when paid by the hour, it sometimes feels
we should be doing something - they don't pay us for not doing anything right?

I also notice this when colleage coaches/facilitators are facilitating. They
tend to be there, be in the lead of the group/process (because they like it, are
good at it, the reason they became facilitators).

Many years ago, Willem and I have co-created the Agile Open conference series,
exploring Open Space Technology to run a participant-driven conference. Running
open spaces has been a great exercise and exploration in how much or rather how
little facilitation a group needs to let a great event happen. Willem and I
moved towards minimalism: focusing on the rules and principles, setting up the
spaces, and bringing ourselves to the floor. Besides that we let participants
work out stuff by themselves. 

We found little intervention was needed. Setting the initial conditions and then
intervening as little as needed actually helped participants take ownership of
the process, and make the event work for them.

Being a bit of a conference junkie, I've attended many. I noticed some other
agile open space facilitators trying to be in control of quite a few details,
e.g. intervening when a question arises when participants are co-creating the
program on the wall. People will figure it out. Intervening too soon will nudge
them into waiting for/relying on the facilitator to solve things for them.

@@plaatjes!

# Interventions can weaken a system

Doing interventions in a team or an organization can have short-term positive
effects, but on the longer term, it can weaken the system. A team can grow
dependent on the consultant to fix things, to compensate for dysfunctional
patterns. The consultant becomes an indispensible part of the system to be
effective. The longer this happens, the more difficult it becomes to leave, and
the more impactful leaving will be.

It is like Gerald M. Weinberg already described 35 years ago in his Secrets of Consulting book as "Marvin's First and Second Great Secrets":

> "Ninety percent of all illness cures itself - with absolutely no intervention from the doctor. Deal gently with systems that should be able to cure themselves."

> "Repeatedly curing a system that can cure itself will eventually create a system that can't."

# In complex systems, there is no neutral position

One cannot take a neutral stance in a group, team, with a partner, ... When I am
part of a system, I will have influence on this system, whether I intend it or
not. Moving myself 'outside' the system, standing on the sidelines, "just
watching", not wanting to be part of it, does not remove me from the system.
Instead taking this stance will often have unintended consequences.

This also means that as a consultant, I might think I'm standing on the sidelines, observing the team, now and then prodding them to bring about change. In practice I am part of this, I need to be part of this to have influence. I'm in the system, even if I'm pretending to be standing outside. So when taking the 'outside' stance, I will influence the team even when I'm not prodding.

The system will also influence me! I'm part of the system, influencing is mutual. Again, Weinberg wrote about this in Secrets of Consulting, as "Prescott's Pickle Principle" - seeing consultants as cucumbers in an organization jar of brine ;) 

> "Cucumbers get more pickled than brine gets cucumbered. A small system that tries to change a big system through long and continued contact is more likely to be changed itself."

"Change is for other people" we sometimes joke as consultants, sometimes we think we're independent and it's just the organization needing to change. But we know that change is as much for us consultants as well.

# 



# Refs & quotes

Weinberg, Secrets of Consulting ...

Open Space Technology

Satir Coping stances

