_drafts/cypress-first-impressions.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: Fast browser tests with Cypress - First Impressions
tags:
  - architecture
author: Willem van den Ende
image:
---

Imagine your UI and end-to-end tests could run an order of magnitude faster than
they are now? Oh, you don't have end-to-end tests, because they would be too
slow and brittle? I have had that too, don't worry. Imagine then if you could
have cost-effective end-to-end tests. How would that impact your product
development?

## Fast browser tests in addition to...

As Marc and Rob have described in their series on architecting and test-driving Vue.js (see [How to keep Front End complexity in check with Hexagonal Architecture](/2020/09/09/how-to-keep-complexity-in-check-with-hexagonal-architecture.html) and [A Hexagonal Vue.js front-end, by example](/2020/09/25/hexagonal-frontend-example.html)), we like to have tests in our front-ends, for [anything that can possibly break](http://wiki.c2.com/?TestEverythingThatCouldPossiblyBreak). In addition to that, I like to have:

* at least a set of end-to-end tests to check few main scenarios;
* [a playground](https://storybook.js.org) for components we made or just use;
* a type system to make sure everything still hangs together, leaving time to focus on tests for interesting behaviour.

My go to tool for browser and end-to-end tests has been Selenium, at least for
the last ten years. I make a distinction between browser tests and end-to-end
tests, because if you can easily test visual components fast and in isolation,
it becomes attractive to do that as well.

Selenium is battle tested, but it has several moving parts and does not execute
particularly fast. So I tend to automate only a few scenarios, and leave the
rest to non-visual unit tests. I also tend to delay writing Selenium tests until the application is further fleshed out. The risk, that I had materialize, is that we have structured our application and the services it uses in such a way that adding browser tests has become time consuming or nigh-on impossible.

### shortcomings of non-visual tests for a front-end
Interpreting the result of the unit tests in the UI cost mental energy: you have to make the mapping between what the tests tell you, and how it looks on the screen in your imagination. For instance: It is useful to know that a specific validation failure will disable submitting on a forms model, but what does it look like?

I'm quite handy at writing unit tests, so my UI is usually not broken, and the tests pass. When the tests pass, I push a small feature to production and move on to the next part. However, that means that I tend not to look at the UI enough. If there are clumsy interaction patterns, I will not notice them.

I was one of those people who would go: "My tests are great, now I don't have to click through the UI all the time". When I hear something like that now, I cringe. I knew in theory that, apart from observing users, reflectively using the application yourself is a powerful feedback mechanism. Yet some states are hard to achieve in a test situation, and doing this in production is not necessarily feasible. So when, after a long time, I am finally brave to click through the UI, I go "Oh. this is ... bad!". And because it is slow and cumbersome, I can't immediately fix it, and the pattern repeats.

```
exploratory testing -> focus on user needs
hard to achieve states -> exploratory test cost -> minus exploratory testing -> hard to achieve states

if it hurts, do it more often:
exploratory testing -> speed of exploratory testing -> minus hard to achieve states
```


But if everything is manual, this is still expensive, and doesn't scale. The time elapsed from an incoming user issue to first reproduction remains high (especially if it is a part of the UI we haven't worked on in a while).

### Selium works, but is tiring
Selenium helps me to see the UI in action, but watching it run the tests, including browsers spawning etc is tiring. So in effect I use it similarly to unit tests. I look at the UI I am developing, and when a test fails, but not otherwise, because the threshold is too high.

### What if we made our system fast?
End-to-end tests can be fast, if you [design the front-end and backend system(s) for fast test runs](/2020/09/17/test-architecture.html). I have done this, but in existing systems that option is not always available. Rather it is something we have to work towards. This is an area where a modular browser testing tool like Cypress can come in handy.

I've made another diagram of effects to illustrate what happens when it is easy to set up an exploratory test quickly.
![Diagram is explained below.](/attachments/blogposts/2020/cypress-doe-exploratory.jpg)
When setup speed is high, we can do more exploratory testing, which means we have fewer defects, and more time available to do automated tests, which improves our setup speed.

## Why Cypress

What is powerful about [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/), is that it lives in
the same environment as the SPA front-end. Same language, same toolchain, same
people. Working test-first, without hand-offs and waiting was a game changer for
unit tests, and now with Cypress it can be the same for UI tests and end-to-end tests as well.

Cypress makes it easy to separate end-to-end tests and UI tests. Since the tests
are white-box, and the test-code inhabits the same space as the UI code, it is
easier to isolate small bits of the UI and test them visually, quickly. Cypress
offers support code to start where you are, possibly with end-to-end tests, and
stub out dependencies as you go.

If you start fresh, Cypress lowers the bar for developing with
[hexagons](/2020/08/20/hexagonal-architecture.html) and using the [Humble
Dialog pattern](http://xunitpatterns.com/Humble%20Object.html) instead of a tightly coupled network.

Changing the speed at which something runs by an order of magnitude is a game
changer. I've experienced this with test driven development at the unit level in
the past, and once with Selenium (after architecting the application to be
fast).

-> @TODO more DOE here

In order to give you an impression of the speed, I made a small video, generated by `cypress run`. The commentary is mine, the video was made without any additional work, this comes out of the box.
<video width="100%" controls alt="A video of the testrunner made from a CI script. Runs six tests in twelve seconds. Initial startup time is about five seconds">
  <source src="/attachments/blogposts/2020/cypress_run.mp4" type="video/mp4">
Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

You can always slow down fast tests if you need, the other way around is much more difficult.

## background / further reading / stuff that now has partly been addd to Instead of
&#x2013; see also [testcafe - A node.js tool to automate end-to-end web testing | TestCafe](a_node_js_tool_to_automate_end_to_end_web_testing_testcafe.md) - this has built in support for using things like google auth. Was recommended on twitter @TODO dig out tweet - this has built in support for using things like google auth. Was recommended on twitter @TODO dig out tweet. For what I'm working on now, I want home grown authentication for a change, I might explore test cafe for other projects.
[cypress accessible blog example](cypress_example_recipes_examples_blogs_a11y_at_master_cypress_io_cypress_example_recipes.md)
[Cypress](20200925094231-cypress.md)

Commit message:

exploratory tests can be motivating, but that is not enough.

_drafts/cypress-first-impressions.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: Fast browser tests with Cypress - First Impressions
tags:
  - architecture
author: Willem van den Ende
image:
---

Imagine your UI and end-to-end tests could run an order of magnitude faster than
they are now? Oh, you don't have end-to-end tests, because they would be too
slow and brittle? I have had that too, don't worry. Imagine then if you could
have cost-effective end-to-end tests. How would that impact your product
development?

## Fast browser tests in addition to...

As Marc and Rob have described in their series on architecting and test-driving Vue.js (see [How to keep Front End complexity in check with Hexagonal Architecture](/2020/09/09/how-to-keep-complexity-in-check-with-hexagonal-architecture.html) and [A Hexagonal Vue.js front-end, by example](/2020/09/25/hexagonal-frontend-example.html)), we like to have tests in our front-ends, for [anything that can possibly break](http://wiki.c2.com/?TestEverythingThatCouldPossiblyBreak). In addition to that, I like to have:

* at least a set of end-to-end tests to check few main scenarios;
* [a playground](https://storybook.js.org) for components we made or just use;
* a type system to make sure everything still hangs together, leaving time to focus on tests for interesting behaviour.

My go to tool for browser and end-to-end tests has been Selenium, at least for
the last ten years. I make a distinction between browser tests and end-to-end
tests, because if you can easily test visual components fast and in isolation,
it becomes attractive to do that as well.

Selenium is battle tested, but it has several moving parts and does not execute
particularly fast. So I tend to automate only a few scenarios, and leave the
rest to non-visual unit tests. I also tend to delay writing Selenium tests until the application is further fleshed out. The risk, that I had materialize, is that we have structured our application and the services it uses in such a way that adding browser tests has become time consuming or nigh-on impossible.

### shortcomings of non-visual tests for a front-end
Interpreting the result of the unit tests in the UI cost mental energy: you have to make the mapping between what the tests tell you, and how it looks on the screen in your imagination. For instance: It is useful to know that a specific validation failure will disable submitting on a forms model, but what does it look like?

I'm quite handy at writing unit tests, so my UI is usually not broken, and the tests pass. When the tests pass, I push a small feature to production and move on to the next part. However, that means that I tend not to look at the UI enough. If there are clumsy interaction patterns, I will not notice them.

I was one of those people who would go: "My tests are great, now I don't have to click through the UI all the time". When I hear something like that now, I cringe. I knew in theory that, apart from observing users, reflectively using the application yourself is a powerful feedback mechanism. Yet some states are hard to achieve in a test situation, and doing this in production is not necessarily feasible. So when, after a long time, I am finally brave to click through the UI, I go "Oh. this is ... bad!". And because it is slow and cumbersome, I can't immediately fix it, and the pattern repeats.

A quick diagram of effects illustrates our predicament:
![Diagram of effects, explanation below](/attachments/blogposts/2020/cypress-hard-states-.jpg)
The optimistic loop is exploratory testing leads to better UX, which in turn leads to more motivation. When we are motivated, we do more exploratory testing, etc. This is limited by the time we have available _and_ by hard to achieve states. The more features we have, the more hard to achieve states we have, the fewer exploratory tests we can do.

We can do more exploratory tests by sheer force of will, or throwing more people at the problem. But if everything is manual, this is expensive, and doesn't scale. The time elapsed from an incoming user issue to first reproduction remains high, especially if it is a part of the UI we haven't worked on in a while.

### Selium works, but is tiring
Selenium helps me to see the UI in action, but watching it run the tests, including browsers spawning etc is tiring. So in effect I use it similarly to unit tests. I look at the UI I am developing, and when a test fails, but not otherwise, because the threshold is too high.

### What if we made our system fast?
End-to-end tests can be fast, if you [design the front-end and backend system(s) for fast test runs](/2020/09/17/test-architecture.html). I have done this, but in existing systems that option is not always available. Rather it is something we have to work towards. This is an area where a modular browser testing tool like Cypress can come in handy.

I've made another diagram of effects to illustrate what happens when it is easy to set up an exploratory test quickly.
![Diagram is explained below.](/attachments/blogposts/2020/cypress-doe-exploratory.jpg)
When setup speed is high, we can do more exploratory testing, which means we have fewer defects, and more time available to do automated tests, which improves our setup speed.

## Why Cypress

What is powerful about [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/), is that it lives in
the same environment as the SPA front-end. Same language, same toolchain, same
people. Working test-first, without hand-offs and waiting was a game changer for
unit tests, and now with Cypress it can be the same for UI tests and end-to-end tests as well.

Cypress makes it easy to separate end-to-end tests and UI tests. Since the tests
are white-box, and the test-code inhabits the same space as the UI code, it is
easier to isolate small bits of the UI and test them visually, quickly. Cypress
offers support code to start where you are, possibly with end-to-end tests, and
stub out dependencies as you go.

If you start fresh, Cypress lowers the bar for developing with
[hexagons](/2020/08/20/hexagonal-architecture.html) and using the [Humble
Dialog pattern](http://xunitpatterns.com/Humble%20Object.html) instead of a tightly coupled network.

Changing the speed at which something runs by an order of magnitude is a game
changer. I've experienced this with test driven development at the unit level in
the past, and once with Selenium (after architecting the application to be
fast).

-> @TODO more DOE here

In order to give you an impression of the speed, I made a small video, generated by `cypress run`. The commentary is mine, the video was made without any additional work, this comes out of the box.
<video width="100%" controls alt="A video of the testrunner made from a CI script. Runs six tests in twelve seconds. Initial startup time is about five seconds">
  <source src="/attachments/blogposts/2020/cypress_run.mp4" type="video/mp4">
Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

You can always slow down fast tests if you need, the other way around is much more difficult.

## background / further reading / stuff that now has partly been addd to Instead of
&#x2013; see also [testcafe - A node.js tool to automate end-to-end web testing | TestCafe](a_node_js_tool_to_automate_end_to_end_web_testing_testcafe.md) - this has built in support for using things like google auth. Was recommended on twitter @TODO dig out tweet - this has built in support for using things like google auth. Was recommended on twitter @TODO dig out tweet. For what I'm working on now, I want home grown authentication for a change, I might explore test cafe for other projects.
[cypress accessible blog example](cypress_example_recipes_examples_blogs_a11y_at_master_cypress_io_cypress_example_recipes.md)
[Cypress](20200925094231-cypress.md)
