_drafts/flow-distribution.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: We have no time to improve
tags:
  - productivity
  - agile fluency
  - feedback
  - systems thinking
author: Marc Evers, Willem van den Ende
image: 
---
# Introduction
subtitle: use flow distribution to visualize where to find time.

"We have no time to improve" is something we hear regularly when consulting. Our knee jerk response is the old dutch proverb: 

   You don't have time, you make time".

# A vicious cycle
This is easier said than done. Where do you find the time, and how do you exploit the time you found as a team?

(implementatiedetail, misschien schrappen, begint ook gelijk met AF, maar dit is breder. AF misschien voor in de sales blurb onderaan). We frequently do architecture and process reviews for different companies. Using Agile Fluency diagnostic workshops to get insight in team capabilities. We see some patterns emerging.

We talk to many teams in big organizations. When we ask them about what share of
their time they spend on fixing defects, this is more often than not 50%.
Because the defect work is taking such a large share, the teams can get little
customer value work ('feature work') done, which increases the pressure on the
team.

Often, these teams feel so much pressure that they do not feel they have time
for any improvements, however promising these might seem. For instance adding
automated tests, making builds more stable, or even something as basic as
simplifying build scripts so that all developers can add tests or split files.

These teams seem to be caught in a vicious cycle that becomes worse over time,
as defects tend to increase when improvements are left out. Improvements like
adding unit and other automated tests are often understood to have a noticeable effect only on the
medium to long term, which makes it hard to claim time for these. Investing in
improvements would have a devastating effect on the amount the feature work the
team could get done. Or has it?

@TODO sketch this in a diagram of effects as well (possibly miro)

# Getting insight in your work: flow distribution 

Let's have a look at the different kind of work that a typical team from a big organization does. We represent this by drawing a bar, the height of the bar represents 100% of the work a team can do.

![flow distribution: the height of the bar represents the time spent on work](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-0.jpg)

We see that many teams are spending 50% of their time on defects, leaving only
50% for work that adds value.

![flow distribution: a lot of companies are spending half of their time on average on defects](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-1.jpg)

This kind of visualization of what share of their time a teams spends on is
called a **flow distribution**, we learnt this from the book "Project to Product"
by Mik Kersten. Visualizing the flow distribution of your work can give valuable
and sometimes painful insights in what you spend your time on.

If we zoom in on the 'feature work', we see some interesting things. As these
teams are struggling with a high volume of defect work, they "don't have time" for
improvements, e.g. keeping the code base in good shape. So technical debt
accumulates and puts a tax on all the work. Everything is just harder to
understand, harder to change.

Furthermore, there are even more defects than the team initially thinks there
are. In our agile fluency workshops, we always ask about the testing process before
things are delivered to production. Often, there is late testing or a separate
testing group that tests bigger batches at the end of development. 

Because these defects do not escape to production or to customers, the team
tends to think it is not that bad, or sometimes they think this is normal in
software development. On top of that we have only mentioned the time software developers spend on defets, we have not even started to count the number of testers or customer support people needed to get the system in a good state for customers.

These activities surface defects, that are fed back to the developers. The
longer this feedback loop, the more effort it takes to understand and fix these
defects. This is a more than linear effect: defects that are found later have a
much larger impact. So this eats away a significant share of the 'feature' time.

![flow distribution: of the time not spend on bugs, a small part is spent on features, the rest on struggles with technical debt and fixing issues that come back from test](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-2.jpg)

The net time spent on delivering value is even smaller than you'd initially
expect. No wonder that people think the team is slow and management puts a lot
of pressure on them. Even though the pressure actually has the opposite effect
of what management intends to achieve.

# You can always make time for improvements, but start small

Eventually, the team should work on reducing defects and technical debt, as this
will make them much more productive. But this is a long term effect that
requires investment. Claiming time for such an investment is a hard sell, as it
has no short term benefits...or has it?

The leverage point here is to do small improvements that will help reducing the
development cycle feedback loops. Getting better feedback on development work
earlier will provide gains on the short term.

The challenge is to start out with tiny improvement efforts. This might be for
instance pair programming, or doing a walkthrough of the code together when a
developer has finished something, instead of waiting for pull request feedback.

![flow distribution: a small amount of time dedicated to improvements will affect technical debt and defects eventually, but it in the short term it will already affect the issues coming back from test](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-3.jpg)

These tiny improvements start paying back pretty soon, in less things coming
back from test, as indicated by the arrows. They also have longer term impact by
reducing technical debt and reducing defects from production, as indicated by
the || delay symbol on the arrows.

Once the improvements start paying off, the team is getting a bit more time
available. Re-investing this time in more improvements will have the biggest
long term payoff, but it can also be useful to spend a bit of the gains on extra
feature work, to increase visibility and build a bit of goodwill.

![flow distribution: reducing the time spent on issues from test and reducing some technical debt creates more time for improvements and more time for feature work](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-4.jpg)

Eventually, the number of defects will start going down. The vicious circle has
been turned into a virtuous one.

![flow distribution: eventually defect work goes down and the increase of feature work will be substantial](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-5.jpg)


# References

- Mik Kersten, Project to Product (2018)
- Mike Hill wrote a series of posts about the value of taking baby steps: [Many
  More Much Smaller Steps](https://www.geepawhill.org/2021/09/29/many-more-much-smaller-steps-first-sketch/)

Commit message:

call to action in progresss, factored out overtime post

_drafts/flow-distribution.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: We have no time to improve
tags:
  - productivity
  - agile fluency
  - feedback
  - systems thinking
author: Marc Evers, Willem van den Ende
image: 
---
# Introduction
subtitle: use flow distribution to visualize where to find time.


"We have no time to improve" is something we hear regularly when consulting. Our knee jerk response is the old dutch proverb: 

   You don't have time, you make time".

In our experience, improvements pay off faster than people believe, so it is worth making time to improve.

# A vicious cycle
This is easier said than done. Where do you find the time, and how do you exploit the time you found as a team?

(implementatiedetail, is meer voor ons waar het uitkomt. misschien schrappen, begint ook gelijk met AF, maar dit is breder. AF misschien voor in de sales blurb onderaan, het staat ook verderop). We frequently do architecture and process reviews for different companies. Using Agile Fluency diagnostic workshops to get insight in team capabilities. We see some patterns emerging.

We talk to many teams in big organizations. When we ask them about what share of
their time they spend on fixing defects, this is more often than not 50%.
Because the defect work is taking such a large share, the teams can get little
customer value work ('feature work') done, which increases the pressure on the
team.

Often, these teams feel so much pressure that they do not feel they have time
for any improvements, however promising these might seem. For instance adding
automated tests, making builds more stable, or even something as basic as
simplifying build scripts so that all developers can add tests or split files.

These teams seem to be caught in a vicious cycle that becomes worse over time,
as defects tend to increase when improvements are left out. Improvements like
adding unit and other automated tests are often understood to have a noticeable effect only on the
medium to long term, which makes it hard to claim time for these. Investing in
improvements would have a devastating effect on the amount the feature work the
team could get done. Or has it?

@TODO sketch this in a diagram of effects as well (possibly miro)

# Getting insight in your work: flow distribution 

Let's have a look at the different kind of work that a typical team from a big organization does. We represent this by drawing a bar, the height of the bar represents 100% of the work a team can do.

![flow distribution: the height of the bar represents the time spent on work](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-0.jpg)

We see that many teams are spending 50% of their time on defects, leaving only
50% for work that adds value.

![flow distribution: a lot of companies are spending half of their time on average on defects](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-1.jpg)

This kind of visualization of what share of their time a teams spends on is
called a **flow distribution**, we learnt this from the book "Project to Product"
by Mik Kersten. Visualizing the flow distribution of your work can give valuable
and sometimes painful insights in what you spend your time on.

If we zoom in on the 'feature work', we see some interesting things. As these
teams are struggling with a high volume of defect work, they "don't have time" for
improvements, e.g. keeping the code base in good shape. So technical debt
accumulates and puts a tax on all the work. Everything is just harder to
understand, harder to change.

Furthermore, there are even more defects than the team initially thinks there
are. In our agile fluency workshops, we always ask about the testing process before
things are delivered to production. Often, there is late testing or a separate
testing group that tests bigger batches at the end of development. 

Because these defects do not escape to production or to customers, the team
tends to think it is not that bad, or sometimes they think this is normal in
software development. On top of that we have only mentioned the time software developers spend on defets, we have not even started to count the number of testers or customer support people needed to get the system in a good state for customers.

These activities surface defects, that are fed back to the developers. The
longer this feedback loop, the more effort it takes to understand and fix these
defects. This is a more than linear effect: defects that are found later have a
much larger impact. So this eats away a significant share of the 'feature' time.

![flow distribution: of the time not spend on bugs, a small part is spent on features, the rest on struggles with technical debt and fixing issues that come back from test](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-2.jpg)

The net time spent on delivering value is even smaller than you'd initially
expect. No wonder that people think the team is slow and management puts a lot
of pressure on them. Even though the pressure actually has the opposite effect
of what management intends to achieve.

# You can always make time for improvements, but start small

Eventually, the team should work on reducing defects and technical debt, as this
will make them much more productive. But this is a long term effect that
requires investment. Claiming time for such an investment is a hard sell, as it
has no short term benefits...or has it?

The leverage point here is to do small improvements that will help reducing the
development cycle feedback loops. Getting better feedback on development work
earlier will provide gains on the short term.

The challenge is to start out with tiny improvement efforts. This might be for
instance pair programming, or doing a walkthrough of the code together when a
developer has finished something, instead of waiting for pull request feedback.

![flow distribution: a small amount of time dedicated to improvements will affect technical debt and defects eventually, but it in the short term it will already affect the issues coming back from test](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-3.jpg)

These tiny improvements start paying back pretty soon, in less things coming
back from test, as indicated by the arrows. They also have longer term impact by
reducing technical debt and reducing defects from production, as indicated by
the || delay symbol on the arrows.

Once the improvements start paying off, the team is getting a bit more time
available. Re-investing this time in more improvements will have the biggest
long term payoff, but it can also be useful to spend a bit of the gains on extra
feature work, to increase visibility and build a bit of goodwill.

![flow distribution: reducing the time spent on issues from test and reducing some technical debt creates more time for improvements and more time for feature work](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-4.jpg)

Eventually, the number of defects will start going down. The vicious circle has
been turned into a virtuous one.

![flow distribution: eventually defect work goes down and the increase of feature work will be substantial](/attachments/blogposts/2022/flowdistribution-5.jpg)

# References

- Mik Kersten, Project to Product (2018)
- Mike Hill wrote a series of posts about the value of taking baby steps: [Many
  More Much Smaller Steps](https://www.geepawhill.org/2021/09/29/many-more-much-smaller-steps-first-sketch/)

# @@TODO call to action

These insights emerged from architecture and process reviews we did for various companies. Using Agile Fluency diagnostic workshops clients and teams quickly get insight in team capabilities and improvement actions. Talk to us to see what this can mean for you and your organisation.
