---
layout: post
title: Systems Thinking for Team Growth
tags:
  - agile fluency
  - systems thinking
author: Marc Evers, Rob Westgeest
image:
---

We (Rob & Marc) have been licensed Agile Fluency facilitators for about a year
now. We have run a number of diagnostic workshops with teams this year and we
have developed a specific way of making sense of what we learn from a team and
building recommendations for growth. In this post we will show how we apply a
technique called diagram of effects for getting to effective team feedback.

## Fluency and team growth


## What happens in a team diagnostic workshop

In a diagnostic workshop, team members fill in a questionnaire and we discuss
their answers afterwards. From these conversations, a rich picture of the team
dynamics emerges. It gives insights in how the team is doing with respect to the
Focusing, Delivering and Optimizing zones from the Agile Fluency model.

We tend to take ample time for these conversations, more than recommended in the
Agile Fluency facilitators course, because we see that this results in quite
detailed, rich picture of the team, how they are doing, the different team
members' perspectives, the issues they are running into.

We do not give recommendations during the workshop, but team member tend to find
the workshop itself and the conversations already valuable. After gathering all
this information, it is up to us to distil a report back to the team, with some
recommendations for them to grow.

## Diagrams of Effects to make sense of it all

We have been using diagrams of effects for ages to make sense of what is happening, in projects, teams, organizations, and to get insights into what makes a system hard to change. It helps us to find better experiments to run and more effective interventions.
@@explain

We got this technique from Gerald Weinberg, who uses this extensively in his
Quality Software Management series. There are similar techniques like causal
loop diagrams.

These techniques come from the field of systems thinking. We do not try to
create a correct or right model of reality nor do we try to design an ideal
situation, because that would not be appropriate for complex systems like teams
and organizations. We use them very much as a collaborative sensemaking
technique, to build a shared understanding and to find sensible directions for
change. @@Cynefin linkje?

## Processing

So how do we proceed after a diagnostic workshop? We make lots of notes and
write down quotes from team members. We go through our notes, and usually
already see some themes emerging. Especially when working with multiple teams
within the same organization or department we soon start to see patterns emerge.

Based on our notes we start writing variables on post-it notes. We transform the
things we heard into variables, things that can vary, go up or down, become more
or less. As a guideline (again from Weinberg) we formulate them as things we can
**measure or observe**.

![plaatje van initiele dump]()

This huge stack of post-its, whether it is on a whiteboard or in a tool like
Miro, is quite daunting. So we start to do a bit of grouping related things
together (are we seeing some themes?) and then see if we can find some causal
relations between variables - if this goes up, does that one also go up? is the
relation direct or does it work through a third variable? This is not exact
science, but more about finding plausible effects in this system.

![plaatje hiervan zou mooi zijn]()

@@more

## Reporting it back

Normally, we apply this technique together with the people involved. The
conversations that take place while co-creating the diagram are as important as
the picture that comes out. And the resulting diagram represents how this group
of people sees their world.

Showing a finished diagram to a team does not work. It provides too much detail
at once and no context. So we think of a way to build up the diagram in steps
during the feedback session, so that we can tell our story and our
considerations. This includes the disclaimer that this is our interpretation of
what we saw and heard.
