_drafts/test-driving-a-command-line-interface-in-python.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: Test drive a command line inferface in python
tags:
  - continuous delivery
  - architecture
author: Rob Westgeest

---

Testing the command line interface should be just like testing a rest interface. It is an adapter concern that we should be test drive, separate from the business logic. In this post I'll show and approach to test drive the command line interface of an application in python.

## Context - the application

I am writing a utility to create and manage invoices for clients. You may wonder why. There's bookkeeping applications you can use. True, my context is a bit out of the ordinary, and, I really dislike the invoicing module, that I pay an additional fee for, in my current bookkeeping application. The application needs to generate PDF invoices for clients really easily. And it must work for different organisational units (for example, my business, my wife's, who has many small invoices to handle, and some personal business as well). 

## The choice for a CLI

Since I need something quickly (generate similar repeated invoices for a client) and grow later (maybe integrate with the bookkeeping application, mailing the invoices, making it easy for my wife to use it and so on), I decided to make a command line interface (lets call it a script) first and maybe create a web front-end later. 

## Testing issues with scripts

I have used several command argument parsers for multiple personal projects and never bothered to test them. First of all because it where personal projects, no other user would be bothered by glitches in the command line. Secondly, because of the following hurdle. Calling a script and capturing the output to see what it is doing is one thing. But what if the script is generating (binary) files, make changes to some sort of database, integrate with APIs and has some business logic as well? Then integrated tests becomes a pain and simply calling the script from the command line and observing the effects in several places doesn't cut it.

In the past 18month or so, I have been working for a big organisation where lots of teams and individuals use (a.o.) python scripts to execute smaller and bigger automation tasks. They typically have no clue how start testing those scripts. Most of those scripts integrate stuff much like I mentioned before.

## Hexagonal approach

My invoicing app will be a script at first, but one with real stuff to do; It will have to deal with TAX rules (VAT and potentially others). It will maintain rules around generating invoice numbers, payment periods, totals. It will make it possible to manage customers, generate their invoices with as few user input as possible, it will produce pdf output and I needs to deal with multiple organisation units (my professional, my wifes professional, and personal). 

Testing the business rules focusses on the domain, testing the adapter integration with some storage of invoices and customers etc. (whatever that storege is, haven't decided yet) is a separate issue. 

Testing the command line interface should be just like testing a rest interface. It is an adapter concern that we should be test drive, separate from the business logic. 

## Introducing 'click'

[Click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/){:target="_blank"} is, once you understand it's model, and easy to use python based argument parser. It support nested groups of commands and arguments and options for each of the levels. For example:

~~~python
@click.group(name='aws') # root level group
def my_app():
    pass

@my_app.group()          # sub level group within the root level group
def s3():
    pass

@s3.command()            # command within the sub level group 
def ls():
    print('invoke list')
~~~

would make it possible to parse:

~~~bash
aws s3 ls
~~~ 

The decorators `command` and `group` accept arguments to specify options and parameters for the groups and commands, so that enabling your script to parse:

~~~bash
aws --verbose s3 --account-name my-account ls my-bucket
~~~

is very easy to do.

It even has a `CliRunner()` for testing, to enable you to invoke a command like this:

~~~python
runner = CliRunner()
runner.invoke(my_app, ['s3', 'ls'])
~~~


## Getting to work

The case is the following. As an initial case I want to list the customers, so that I can select one to send a bill to. In ports and adapters that could look a bit like:

![hexagon list customers](blah.png)

My first test could look like this (it actually did):

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customer_names_and_codes_in_texts(self):
        runner = CliRunner()
        assert_that(runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))
~~~

> Oh... eh to the pytest users. Yes, I know, I don't have to make a test case class. pytest has a different opinion on structuring tests. We at QWAN, however, still like to use test case classes to group tests, and have multiple groups of tests in a file. because it helps  the readability of the tests organisation.

After getting the failure:

`E       NameError: name 'invoicer_app' is not defined`

And adding code step by step, the implementation looks like this (similar to the click example above)

~~~python
@click.group(name='invoicer')
def invoicer_app():
    pass

@invoicer_app.group()
def customers():
    pass

@customers.command()
def list():
    print('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name')
~~~


## The problem with this approach 

The test works, and is good enough to get aquainted with `click` but I am not happy with the situation. What I have specified is that whatever happens, listing customers produces "QWAN,  Quality Without A Name". Somehow I need to be able to influence the result:

~~~
Given my querying all customers produces a list with just "Quality Without A Name"
When listing all customers through the cli
Then "QWAN  Quality Without A Name" is the result.
~~~

To do that we need to be able to influence the result whatever the `list` function is interacting with. 

The issue with most easy to use libraries like `click` (or `flask` for http interfaces) is that the typical examples use top level functions. Even though they have testing support, they seem to focus on integrated testing. They don't describe how to injecting dependencies using their framework.

## Injecting dependencies

Before moving on, I remove the `list()` implementation to prevent false postitives:

~~~python
@customers.command()
def list():
    pass
~~~

We like to maintain control over our dependencies. Dependency injection should not be some magic process. So in my using the `Given, When,  Then Example above, my test should look like: 

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customer_names_and_codes_in_texts(self):
        runner = CliRunner()
        # Given the allCustomersQuery produces a customer with 
        #   short_hand="QWAN" and name="Quality Without A Name")
        resulting_output = runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))
~~~

To make the test complete, I need something like:

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customer_names_and_codes_in_texts(self):
        runner = CliRunner()
        customer_query = Mock()
        CustomerCli(customer_query)
        customer_query.return_value = [aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name")]
        resulting_output = runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))
~~~

This results in:
~~~
>       CustomerCli(customerQuery)
E       NameError: name 'CustomerCli' is not defined
~~~

So step by step I define the customer cli:
class CustomerCli:
    def __init__(self, customer_query):
        pass
(self, customer_query):
        pass
~~~

resulting in:
~~~
E       AssertionError: 
E       Expected: 'QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'
E            but: was ''
~~~

Unsure of wether `click` would actually work with instance methods, I move the customers function and the list function as methods in the CustomerCli:

~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    def __init__(self, customer_query):
        pass

    @invoicer_app.group()
    def customers(self):
        pass

    @customers.command()
    def list(self):
        pass
~~~

the failure remains the same, but is it actually getting to list? Lets try the fake again.

~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    # ...
    @customers.command()
    def list(self):
        print('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name')
~~~

Nope it does not. Still the same failure. Apparently, `click` only works with plain functions. I recall a trick that I used for flask routes. I created a `register` method in the route classes and used inner functions there. 

So I move the `customers` and `list` methods to inner functions of a register method, that gets the invoicer_app function injected. In python, this is quite a small step. A bit of indenting, removing self parameters:

~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    def __init__(self, customer_query):
        pass
    def register(self, invoicer_app):
        @invoicer_app.group()
        def customers():
            pass

        @customers.command()
        def list():
            print('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name')
~~~

And: BAM! Green. Works! Ship it! ;-) 

Now lets remove the fakes:

~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    def __init__(self, customer_query):
        self._customer_query = customer_query

    def register(self, invoicer_app):
        @invoicer_app.group()
        def customers():
            pass

        @customers.command()
        def list():
            customer = self._customer_query()[0]
            print('{}\t{}'.format(customer.short_hand, customer.name))
~~~

This works, but only for one customer. I need to ad a test for multiple customers. As a small refactoring I rename the current test to `test_list_customers_formats_a_customers_short_hand_and_name`. The new test looks like:

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    # ...
    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customers(self):
        runner = CliRunner()
        customer_query = Mock()
        CustomerCli(customer_query).register(invoicer_app)
        customer_query.return_value = [
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name"),
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="FRSH", name="Fresh Bakery")
            ]
        resulting_output = runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('''QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\nFRSH\tFresh Bakery\n'''))
~~~

I generalise the implementation to using lists:


~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    # ...
    def register(self, invoicer_app):
        # ...
        @customers.command()
        def list():
            for customer in self._customer_query():
                print('{}\t{}'.format(customer.short_hand, customer.name))
~~~

There's some duplication in the tests, so I clean them up a bit:

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    @pytest.fixture(autouse=True)
    def setup(self):
        self.runner = CliRunner()
        self.customer_query = Mock()
        CustomerCli(self.customer_query).register(invoicer_app)
    
    def test_list_customers_formats_a_customers_short_hand_and_name(self):
        self.customer_query.return_value = [aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name")]
        resulting_output = self.runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))

    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customers(self):
        self.customer_query.return_value = [
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name"),
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="FRSH", name="Fresh Bakery")
            ]
        resulting_output = self.runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('''QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\nFRSH\tFresh Bakery\n'''))
~~~

Still not being happy with the invoke noise, that repeats itself in both tests, I extract it in a method (that may eventually be pulled up in a super class, but lets not get ahead of myself).

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    @pytest.fixture(autouse=True)
    def setup(self):
        self.runner = CliRunner()
        self.customer_query = Mock()
        CustomerCli(self.customer_query).register(invoicer_app)
    
    def run_cli(self, *arguments):
        return self.runner.invoke(invoicer_app, arguments)

    def test_list_customers_formats_a_customers_short_hand_and_name(self):
        self.customer_query.return_value = [aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name")]
        resulting_output = self.run_cli('customers', 'list').output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))

    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customers(self):
        self.customer_query.return_value = [
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name"),
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="FRSH", name="Fresh Bakery")
            ]
        resulting_output = self.run_cli('customers', 'list').output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('''QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\nFRSH\tFresh Bakery\n'''))
~~~

## Testing End to end through the command line 

In hour [test architecture blog entry](https://www.qwan.eu/2020/09/17/test-architecture.html) we elaborated on choosing end to end-ness of tests. With my current cli test setup, I made it possible to choose end to end-ness and still manage the context of my end to end test with ease. 

The current test-setup allows me to create a setup with in memory repositories for customers, invoices and whatever I need. 

Say my main would look like this:

~~~python
~~~

then my end to end test will look like this:

~~~python
~~~

## Conclusion

Test driving a cli is definitely doable. It needs a bit of a testing mindset, creativity and looking for libs that help you just enough. 
I created a basis for test driving my command line interface, allowing me to develop in a sustainable way. 

<aside>
  <h3>Want to apply unit testing or test driven development in places that seem not suitable?</h3>
  <p>We offer workshops on Test Driven Development on legacy code and we can mentor your team in applying it successfully in your own environment.</p>
  <p><div>
    <a href="/training">Learn more about our workshops</a>
  </div></p>
</aside>

Commit message:

added end to end scope

_drafts/test-driving-a-command-line-interface-in-python.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: Test drive a command line inferface in python
tags:
  - continuous delivery
  - architecture
author: Rob Westgeest

---

Testing the command line interface should be just like testing a rest interface. It is an adapter concern that we should be test drive, separate from the business logic. In this post I'll show and approach to test drive the command line interface of an application in python.

## Context - the application

I am writing a utility to create and manage invoices for clients. You may wonder why. There's bookkeeping applications you can use. True, my context is a bit out of the ordinary, and, I really dislike the invoicing module, that I pay an additional fee for, in my current bookkeeping application. The application needs to generate PDF invoices for clients really easily. And it must work for different organisational units (for example, my business, my wife's, who has many small invoices to handle, and some personal business as well). 

## The choice for a CLI

Since I need something quickly (generate similar repeated invoices for a client) and grow later (maybe integrate with the bookkeeping application, mailing the invoices, making it easy for my wife to use it and so on), I decided to make a command line interface (lets call it a script) first and maybe create a web front-end later. 

## Testing issues with scripts

I have used several command argument parsers for multiple personal projects and never bothered to test them. First of all because it where personal projects, no other user would be bothered by glitches in the command line. Secondly, because of the following hurdle. Calling a script and capturing the output to see what it is doing is one thing. But what if the script is generating (binary) files, make changes to some sort of database, integrate with APIs and has some business logic as well? Then integrated tests becomes a pain and simply calling the script from the command line and observing the effects in several places doesn't cut it.

In the past 18month or so, I have been working for a big organisation where lots of teams and individuals use (a.o.) python scripts to execute smaller and bigger automation tasks. They typically have no clue how start testing those scripts. Most of those scripts integrate stuff much like I mentioned before.

## Hexagonal approach

My invoicing app will be a script at first, but one with real stuff to do; It will have to deal with TAX rules (VAT and potentially others). It will maintain rules around generating invoice numbers, payment periods, totals. It will make it possible to manage customers, generate their invoices with as few user input as possible, it will produce pdf output and I needs to deal with multiple organisation units (my professional, my wifes professional, and personal). 

Testing the business rules focusses on the domain, testing the adapter integration with some storage of invoices and customers etc. (whatever that storege is, haven't decided yet) is a separate issue. 

Testing the command line interface should be just like testing a rest interface. It is an adapter concern that we should be test drive, separate from the business logic. 

## Introducing 'click'

[Click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/){:target="_blank"} is, once you understand it's model, and easy to use python based argument parser. It support nested groups of commands and arguments and options for each of the levels. For example:

~~~python
@click.group(name='aws') # root level group
def my_app():
    pass

@my_app.group()          # sub level group within the root level group
def s3():
    pass

@s3.command()            # command within the sub level group 
def ls():
    print('invoke list')
~~~

would make it possible to parse:

~~~bash
aws s3 ls
~~~ 

The decorators `command` and `group` accept arguments to specify options and parameters for the groups and commands, so that enabling your script to parse:

~~~bash
aws --verbose s3 --account-name my-account ls my-bucket
~~~

is very easy to do.

It even has a `CliRunner()` for testing, to enable you to invoke a command like this:

~~~python
runner = CliRunner()
runner.invoke(my_app, ['s3', 'ls'])
~~~


## Getting to work

The case is the following. As an initial case I want to list the customers, so that I can select one to send a bill to. In ports and adapters that could look a bit like:

![hexagon list customers](blah.png)

My first test could look like this (it actually did):

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customer_names_and_codes_in_texts(self):
        runner = CliRunner()
        assert_that(runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))
~~~

> Oh... eh to the pytest users. Yes, I know, I don't have to make a test case class. pytest has a different opinion on structuring tests. We at QWAN, however, still like to use test case classes to group tests, and have multiple groups of tests in a file. because it helps  the readability of the tests organisation.

After getting the failure:

`E       NameError: name 'invoicer_app' is not defined`

And adding code step by step, the implementation looks like this (similar to the click example above)

~~~python
@click.group(name='invoicer')
def invoicer_app():
    pass

@invoicer_app.group()
def customers():
    pass

@customers.command()
def list():
    print('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name')
~~~


## The problem with this approach 

The test works, and is good enough to get aquainted with `click` but I am not happy with the situation. What I have specified is that whatever happens, listing customers produces "QWAN,  Quality Without A Name". Somehow I need to be able to influence the result:

~~~
Given my querying all customers produces a list with just "Quality Without A Name"
When listing all customers through the cli
Then "QWAN  Quality Without A Name" is the result.
~~~

To do that we need to be able to influence the result whatever the `list` function is interacting with. 

The issue with most easy to use libraries like `click` (or `flask` for http interfaces) is that the typical examples use top level functions. Even though they have testing support, they seem to focus on integrated testing. They don't describe how to injecting dependencies using their framework.

## Injecting dependencies

Before moving on, I remove the `list()` implementation to prevent false postitives:

~~~python
@customers.command()
def list():
    pass
~~~

We like to maintain control over our dependencies. Dependency injection should not be some magic process. So in my using the `Given, When,  Then Example above, my test should look like: 

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customer_names_and_codes_in_texts(self):
        runner = CliRunner()
        # Given the allCustomersQuery produces a customer with 
        #   short_hand="QWAN" and name="Quality Without A Name")
        resulting_output = runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))
~~~

To make the test complete, I need something like:

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customer_names_and_codes_in_texts(self):
        runner = CliRunner()
        customer_query = Mock()
        CustomerCli(customer_query)
        customer_query.return_value = [aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name")]
        resulting_output = runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))
~~~

This results in:
~~~
>       CustomerCli(customerQuery)
E       NameError: name 'CustomerCli' is not defined
~~~

So step by step I define the customer cli:
class CustomerCli:
    def __init__(self, customer_query):
        pass
(self, customer_query):
        pass
~~~

resulting in:
~~~
E       AssertionError: 
E       Expected: 'QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'
E            but: was ''
~~~

Unsure of wether `click` would actually work with instance methods, I move the customers function and the list function as methods in the CustomerCli:

~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    def __init__(self, customer_query):
        pass

    @invoicer_app.group()
    def customers(self):
        pass

    @customers.command()
    def list(self):
        pass
~~~

the failure remains the same, but is it actually getting to list? Lets try the fake again.

~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    # ...
    @customers.command()
    def list(self):
        print('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name')
~~~

Nope it does not. Still the same failure. Apparently, `click` only works with plain functions. I recall a trick that I used for flask routes. I created a `register` method in the route classes and used inner functions there. 

So I move the `customers` and `list` methods to inner functions of a register method, that gets the invoicer_app function injected. In python, this is quite a small step. A bit of indenting, removing self parameters:

~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    def __init__(self, customer_query):
        pass
    def register(self, invoicer_app):
        @invoicer_app.group()
        def customers():
            pass

        @customers.command()
        def list():
            print('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name')
~~~

And: BAM! Green. Works! Ship it! ;-) 

Now lets remove the fakes:

~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    def __init__(self, customer_query):
        self._customer_query = customer_query

    def register(self, invoicer_app):
        @invoicer_app.group()
        def customers():
            pass

        @customers.command()
        def list():
            customer = self._customer_query()[0]
            print('{}\t{}'.format(customer.short_hand, customer.name))
~~~

This works, but only for one customer. I need to ad a test for multiple customers. As a small refactoring I rename the current test to `test_list_customers_formats_a_customers_short_hand_and_name`. The new test looks like:

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    # ...
    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customers(self):
        runner = CliRunner()
        customer_query = Mock()
        CustomerCli(customer_query).register(invoicer_app)
        customer_query.return_value = [
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name"),
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="FRSH", name="Fresh Bakery")
            ]
        resulting_output = runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('''QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\nFRSH\tFresh Bakery\n'''))
~~~

I generalise the implementation to using lists:


~~~python
class CustomerCli:
    # ...
    def register(self, invoicer_app):
        # ...
        @customers.command()
        def list():
            for customer in self._customer_query():
                print('{}\t{}'.format(customer.short_hand, customer.name))
~~~

There's some duplication in the tests, so I clean them up a bit:

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    @pytest.fixture(autouse=True)
    def setup(self):
        self.runner = CliRunner()
        self.customer_query = Mock()
        CustomerCli(self.customer_query).register(invoicer_app)
    
    def test_list_customers_formats_a_customers_short_hand_and_name(self):
        self.customer_query.return_value = [aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name")]
        resulting_output = self.runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))

    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customers(self):
        self.customer_query.return_value = [
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name"),
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="FRSH", name="Fresh Bakery")
            ]
        resulting_output = self.runner.invoke(invoicer_app, ['customers', 'list']).output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('''QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\nFRSH\tFresh Bakery\n'''))
~~~

Still not being happy with the invoke noise, that repeats itself in both tests, I extract it in a method (that may eventually be pulled up in a super class, but lets not get ahead of myself).

~~~python
class TestCustomerCli:
    @pytest.fixture(autouse=True)
    def setup(self):
        self.runner = CliRunner()
        self.customer_query = Mock()
        CustomerCli(self.customer_query).register(invoicer_app)
    
    def run_cli(self, *arguments):
        return self.runner.invoke(invoicer_app, arguments)

    def test_list_customers_formats_a_customers_short_hand_and_name(self):
        self.customer_query.return_value = [aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name")]
        resulting_output = self.run_cli('customers', 'list').output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))

    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customers(self):
        self.customer_query.return_value = [
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name"),
            aValidCustomer(short_hand="FRSH", name="Fresh Bakery")
            ]
        resulting_output = self.run_cli('customers', 'list').output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('''QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\nFRSH\tFresh Bakery\n'''))
~~~

## Testing End to end through the command line 

In hour [test architecture blog entry](https://www.qwan.eu/2020/09/17/test-architecture.html) we elaborated on choosing end to end-ness of tests. With my current cli test setup, I made it possible to choose end to end-ness and still manage the context of my end to end test with ease. 

The current test-setup allows me to create a setup with in memory repositories for customers, invoices and whatever I need. 

Say my main would look like this:

~~~python
if __name__ == '__main__':
    app = build_cli(customer_repository=InMemoryCustomerRepository.with_standard_customers())
    app()
~~~

then, assuming end to endness up to an in memory repostory, my end to end test  will look like this:

~~~python
class TestCustomerList:
    @pytest.fixture(autouse=True)
    def setup(self):
        self.runner = CliRunner()
        self.customer_repository = InMemoryCustomerRepository()
        self.app = build_cli(customer_repository=self.customer_repository)
    
    def run_cli(self, *arguments):
        return self.runner.invoke(self.app, arguments)

    def test_list_customers_shows_a_list_of_customers(self):
        self.customer_repository.save(aValidCustomer(short_hand="QWAN", name="Quality Without A Name")),
        resulting_output = self.run_cli('customers', 'list').output
        assert_that(resulting_output, equal_to('QWAN\tQuality Without A Name\n'))
~~~

The distinction between the cli adapter integration test and end to end test is small in this example, because the query example is extremely simple. But you'll get the idea, that: 1) it is quite doable to test the cli adapter in isolation, and 2) you can play around with test scope once you have a well defined place to wire the application.

## Conclusion

Test driving a cli is definitely doable. It needs a bit of a testing mindset, creativity and looking for libs that help you just enough. 
I created a basis for test driving my command line interface, allowing me to develop in a sustainable way. 

<aside>
  <h3>Want to apply unit testing or test driven development in places that seem not suitable?</h3>
  <p>We offer workshops on Test Driven Development on legacy code and we can mentor your team in applying it successfully in your own environment.</p>
  <p><div>
    <a href="/training">Learn more about our workshops</a>
  </div></p>
</aside>
