_drafts/whats-cooking-in-qwans-kitchen-september-2023.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: 
tags:
- updates
author: Willem van den Ende
image: 
---


What's cooking in QWAN's kitchen - September 2023.
## Secure By Design
Last week we delivered the first training day inspired by the book Secure by Design, as part of a multi-year learning path we deliver for an agency in the Netherlands.
## Cloud native software architecture
October will see the first installment of our cloud native software architecture day. We'll mostly focus on keeping things focused on the outcomes you want to achieve, loosely coupled, while benefitting from what a particular cloud has to offer.
## Lean Agile Scotland
Willem and Rob will travel to Edinburgh next week to deliver the first Stigmergy workshop. @@link. There are still places available, contact us for a 10% discount (@@link, checkdiscount). @@todo briefly define [[id:e5e2af9b-cc48-4205-bf5d-136579c8a8cb][Stigmergic Action]] (and no, it has no relation to 'the Stig'). We're finalizing preparatoins, it is going to be highly interactive / experiential. Should be good fun! And w
## Agile Cambridge

Agile Cambridge will follow the trail of Stigmergy. Willem and Marc will deliver a slightly shorter (90 mins instead of 120 ), but no less interactive workshop.

## Talking to people
As one of our colleagues said: "We'd rather write blog posts than talk to people". We've found that going out, and hearing for ourselves is very valuable, but it is not something all of us do naturally. Conferences help, but there is a world of people we know outside of conferences, and staying in touch is not always trivial.

Willem and Rob are running some shorter workshops with clients in the Eindhoven area in the week of 9 October. That means Willem will be in the Netherlands for at least several days. He'd love to catch up with people, contact him if you want to have a chat or a drink.

# Call To Action - talk to us, if you can't make it to these conferences

Commit message:

add community tag to community of need post

_drafts/whats-cooking-in-qwans-kitchen-september-2023.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: 
tags:
- updates
author: Willem van den Ende
image: 
---

@@todo image (can be a newspaper or a pan)
@@todo check links

What's cooking in QWAN's kitchen - September 2023.

# New course modules

## Secure By Design
Last week we delivered the first training day inspired by the book Secure by Design, as part of a multi-year learning path we deliver for an agency in the Netherlands.
## Cloud native software architecture
October will see the first installment of our cloud native software architecture day. We'll mostly focus on keeping things focused on the outcomes you want to achieve, loosely coupled, while benefitting from what a particular cloud has to offer.

# Conference workshops on Stigmergy

We've got workshops accepted at conferences that we also sponsor. Acceptance is independent of sponsorship - our other session, a talk on Event Storming, did not make it for these conferences, for instance. We participate in and sponsor these conferences, because they are [Community of Needs]() conferences that allow our field to evolve, and let us learn and make useful connections.

Stigmergy is a mechanism of indirect coordination where actors modify their local environment. They leave traces for others to follow.

Join us to explore how the traces ants leave applies to our practice of software development.

## Lean Agile Scotland

Willem and Rob will travel to Edinburgh next week to deliver the [first
Stigmergy Driven Development workshop](
https://leanagile.scot/programme/stigmergy-driven-development) . There are still
places available, [contact us for a 10% discount](/contact).
This workshop is going to be highly interactive and experiential. It should be good fun!


## Agile Cambridge

Agile Cambridge will follow the trail of Stigmergy. Willem and Marc will deliver a slightly shorter (90 mins instead of 120 ), but no less interactive workshop. [contact us for a 10% discount](/contact).

## Talking to people
As one of our colleagues said: "We'd rather write blog posts than talk to people". We've found that going out, and hearing for ourselves is very valuable, but it is not something all of us do naturally. Conferences help, but there is a world of people we know outside of conferences, and staying in touch is not always trivial.

Willem and Rob are running some shorter workshops with clients in the Eindhoven area in the week of 9 October. That means Willem will be in the Netherlands for at least several days. He'd love to catch up with people, contact him if you want to have a chat or a drink.

# Call To Action - talk to us, if you can't make it to these conferences

We're happy to have conversations on the phone, online or in person.
Otherwise, we'll look forward to to seeing you at one of these conferences!
