_drafts/wrapping-dates-logging-uuids.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: Wrapping dates, logging and UUIDs in concepts of their own
tags:
  - architecture
  - design
author: Marc Evers
image: /attachments/blogposts/2021/wrapping-ids-hexagonal.jpg
---

In our previous post on [Hexagonal Architecture in a
back-end](/2021/01/04/hexagonal-backend-example.html), we mentioned wrapping ID
generation and timestamps in concepts of their own. This might feel a bit
over-designed, but we have some pragmatic reasons to do so. In this post,
we will share the trade-offs and rationale behind wrapping the standard stuff
in abstractions of your own.

- [Forces](#forces)
- [It hurts when writing unit tests](#it-hurts-when-writing-unit-tests)
- [Standard stuff is stable...until it changes](#standard-stuff-is-stableuntil-it-changes)
- [Standard stuff does the job...but does it communicate?](#standard-stuff-does-the-jobbut-does-it-communicate)
- [Standard stuff offers all you need...and so much more](#standard-stuff-offers-all-you-needand-so-much-more)
- [Introduce a seam?](#introduce-a-seam)
- [Resolution: thinking from the domain](#resolution-thinking-from-the-domain)
- [Example: timestamps](#example-timestamps)
- [Example: IDs and ID Generator](#example-ids-and-id-generator)
- [Consequences](#consequences)
- [Considerations](#considerations)
- [References](#references)

## Context

When we find ourselves using primitive types like integers, strings, and lists
to represent something, we call this [Primitive
Obsession](https://www.thecodebuzz.com/awesome-code-primitive-obsession-code-smell-with-example/)
and we start looking for the hidden abstractions behind these primitive types.
Our code makes assumptions about what the integer or string means, and those
assumptions are spread out over the code, making it hard to change. 

If we represent monetary amounts by integers for instance, we need to know how
it works in every location where those integers are used. Is it cents, euros, dollars?

We tend to take a similar approach with other standard language or standard
library things, like dates, timestamps, logging, UUIDs. Most developers
just use these things in their code. They are standard, stable, why would you
put extra boilerplate around those?

We have run into a number of issues that make us encapsulate the standard,
stable things as well rather than use it directly everywhere in our code.

## It hurts when writing unit tests

If an object under test generates a timestamp, we cannot do an assert on the
whole object, because the timestamps will differ. We can assert the
individual attributes except the timestamp, but this makes our test long and
unreadable. We can assert the approximate timestamp, but this makes the test
even more obscure.

```python
class Token:
  def __init__(self, token):
    self._token = token
    self._created_time = datetime.now()

def test_initial_token_is_valid():
  token = Token('1234')
  assert token == ???   # how to test this?
```

It hurts even more when the code under test generates a UUID as a unique
identifier. We have to work around that in our test.

```python
class DiagnosticSessionCreator:
  def create_with_id(self, team):
    return DiagnosticSession(id=uuid.uuid4(), team=team)

def test_creates_valid_diagnostic_session():
  creator = DiagnosticSessionCreator()
  session = creator.create_with_id(team='Team A')
  assert token == ???   # how to test this?
```

When testing code that creates a timestamp or an UUID, we could create a
_seam_ in the production code so that we have control over timestamp/UUID
creation. In our test, we'd like to influence the line of code where the
timestamp or UUID is created, to make it more deterministic.

> _Seam_ is a concept from Working Effectively with Legacy Code book by [Michael
> Feathers](https://twitter.com/mfeathers), the classic book on handling legacy
> code and getting your first test in. A seam is a place in the code where you
> would like to vary behaviour, without having to change that code. You want to
> be able to vary the behaviour from the test.

The refactoring techniques from the Working Effectively with Legacy Code book,
like extracting a creation method, are good techniques when dealing with legacy
code (i.e. code without tests), but they do not necessarily make the code better - _sometimes it gets worse before it gets better_ is the legacy code adage. 

## Standard stuff is stable...until it changes

The standard language and library constructs tend to be pretty stable, but still
their APIs sometimes changes. Alternatively, you grow dissatisfied with your
current logging library and decide this new library does the job better, faster,
etc.

Having dependencies on the standard library all over the place will turn this
into a migration nightmare. The standard stuff doesn't change that much, but if
it does it hurts.

## Standard stuff does the job...but does it communicate?

The standard library names might be close to what we are trying to express in
our domain, but usually there is a gap. 

An example: imagine we have some sort of token that is valid for 60 minutes and
we need to check if it is expired. We compare its timestamp plus 60 minutes
to the current time:

```python
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

class Token:
  EXPIRY_IN_MINUTES=60

  def __init__(self, token):
    self._token = token
    self._created_time = datetime.now()

  # how to test this function?
  def is_expired(self):
    return self._created_time + timedelta(minutes=Token.EXPIRY_IN_MINUTES) < datetime.now()
```

For us the code in `is_expired` is not obvious at first glance. We always make
mistakes with the  greater than/less then operators, and fortunately our unit
tests will save us. This piece of code does not express clearly the intent of
timestamps in our code.

## Standard stuff offers all you need...and so much more

Python `datetime` objects offer all kinds of methods, like `isoweekday`,
`replace`, `-` and we don't need all of those for representing timestamps. For
tokens that expire, we only need to compare, add a time
delta and maybe convert them to and from strings (serialization).

Using an interface that is way broader than what the concept it is representing
needs, creates an [affordance](https://jnd.org/affordances_and_design/) for
using the other stuff when it seems convenient, without having to think hard
about the intent.


## Resolution: thinking from the domain

As a response to the issues mentioned above, we prefer to approach this from a
domain oriented perspective, especially when we are test driving the code.

From our domain, we see the need for a timestamp or a unique identifier. The
`datetime` object or the UUID value are mere implementation details. Our
domain cares about uniqueness of identifiers, not about UUIDs.

So we introduce a small domain concept representing the 'thing' we are dealing with, like a unique identifier. Introducing a domain concept means:
- Thinking about an **intention-revealing, domain-oriented name** for the thing.
- Thinking about the **interface** of the thing: what services does our domain need from this thing?

We encapsulate the knowledge around a timestamp or identifier in a type or class
of its own. We can express more meaning in the code in that way and make the
code better maintainable. This domain focus helps us to get to the core of the
'thing', instead of being guided by the peculiarities of the libraries at hand.

## Example: timestamps

To work more effectively with timestamps, we can introduce a `Clock` class with
a `now` function to return the current time. For testing, we create a
`FixedClock` with the same interface that always returns a stubbed timestamp.

```python
class Clock:
    def now(self):
        return datetime.now(timezone.utc) 

class FixedClock:
    def __init__(self, the_time=datetime.now(timezone.utc)):
        self._the_time = the_time

    def now(self):
        return self._the_time 
```
In Java or C#, we'd create a Clock interface with SystemClock and FixedClock
implementations.

As a next step, we can wrap the `datetime` object in a Timestamp class:

```python
class Timestamp:
    def __init__(self, timestamp):
        self._timestamp = timestamp
    ...

class Clock:
    def now(self):
        return Timestamp(datetime.now(timezone.utc))
```

The Timestamp class expresses the responsibilities of a Timestamp in
this specific domain, and no more. We cannot accidentally and implicitly
introduce a new timestamp responsibility.

There are more reasons to wrap date/time related behaviour in an abstraction of
its own. It provides a place to handle time zone related logic. Even more so
once you realize that UTC and time zones [have some interesting
properties](https://codeblog.jonskeet.uk/2019/03/27/storing-utc-is-not-a-silver-bullet/).

## Example: unique identifiers

We use UUIDs as unique identifiers for our objects. Testing creation logic
that assigns a new id is hard because the UUIDs are not predictable. So we
introduce an `ID` concept and an `IDGenerator`. 

```python
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class ID:
    _uuid: UUID

    @staticmethod
    def from_string(potential_uuid_value):
        ...
        try:
            return ID(UUID(potential_uuid_value))
        except ValueError as e:
            return InvalidID()

    @staticmethod
    def invalid():
        return InvalidID()
    ...
    def __str__(self):
        return str(self._uuid)

class IDGenerator(object):
    def generate_id(self):
        return ID(uuid.uuid4())
```

The `IDGenerator` gets injected in the creation code, here is an example from the Online Agile Fluency Diagnostic application:

```python
class DiagnosticSessionCreator:
    def __init__(self, id_generator=IDGenerator(), ...):
        self.id_generator=id_generator
    ...
    def create_with_id(self, ...):
        ...
        diagnostic_session=DiagnosticSession(id=self.id_generator.generate_id(), ...)
```

This allows us to introduce a `FixedIDGeneratorGenerating` subclass of
`IDGenerator`  which always returns the same stubbed ID:

```python
class TestCreateWithId:
  def test_creates_a_diagnostic_session_with_a_generated_id(self):
    id_generator = FixedIDGeneratorGenerating(aValidID('12'))
    creator = DiagnosticSessionCreator(id_generator=id_generator, ...)
    diagnostic_session = creator.create_with_id(...)
    assert diagnostic_session.id == aValidID('12')
```

The `aValidID` function is a [test data builder](/2020/10/09/test-data-builders.html) for IDs. We have published
the ID, IDGenerator and corresponding test data builder as part of the
[quiltz-domain library on GitHub](https://github.com/qwaneu/quiltz-domain).

> We introduced the IDGenerator early on in the project so that we'd be in
> control of id generation in our tests. Later on, we decided to introduce the
> ID concept to represent identifiers, but also _invalid_ identifiers - incoming
> data in a web application could be invalid and we want to be able to work with
> invalid data conveniently. We found out the hard way that we had waited too
> long with introducing the ID class, because UUIDs were all over the place. It
> took us a few hours to refactor.

## Consequences

If we wrap standard language and library primitives in meaningful abstractions
of their own, we see the following benefits:

- **Code reflects our intent better** and gets less cluttered by language or
  standard library constructs.
- **Code becomes better testable**, as we have more behaviour under control.
- We explicitly **document what we use** from the standard library and we
  **insulate ourselves from changes** in these dependencies. This lowers the
  cost of testing and replacing them when necessary.

Seen through a [Hexagonal Architecture](/2020/08/20/hexagonal-architecture.html)
lens, we see standard library stuff as external dependencies that we want to
separate from our domain. The implementations of our `Clock` and `IDGenerator`
can be seen as _adapters_. This is in line with the Hexagonal Architecture
principle of **domain in the centre, libraries & frameworks on the outside**.

![Wrapping standard library things seen through a hexagonal architecture lens](/attachments/blogposts/2021/wrapping-ids-hexagonal.jpg)

It feels like extra work, not adding much value initially when the codebase is
still small and innocent. But the extra effort is limited and will save you
hours later on.

## Considerations

Initially, it feels like overkill to wrap stable, well-known, relatively simple
standard library constructs in abstractions of their own. So we sometimes start
out with directly using the library within our domain code. We tolerate
libraries, as they are not in control and are less intrusive than frameworks. We
wrap them later on when we notice logic growing around the use of that library.
The longer we wait however, the more painful it becomes. 

With this approach, we are not testing the actual timestamp or UUID generation
in our unit tests. That's ok, we do not need to test standard library behaviour.
We trust it to do its job correctly. Even if we wouldn't trust it, we would
write a few specific _characterization tests_ to capture its behaviour. These
can be useful to 'fix' the behaviour and get early feedback if a newer version
subtly breaks the API.

Creating small, domain-oriented abstractions around standard library primitives
creates a new home for responsibilities. This helps in the quest of [What To
Put Where](/2020/12/23/what-to-put-where.html).

## References

- If you'd like to learn the vocabulary of code smells like Primitive Obsession
  and appropriate refactorings, have a look at our [Code Smells & Refactoring
  cards](/shop)
- The concept of [Connascence](https://connascence.io/), a model for reasoning
  about coupling in code, provides a foundation for wrapping standard
  library things in your own abstractions
- Read more about the Hexagonal Architecture pattern in [our series of posts on this topic](/2020/08/20/hexagonal-architecture.html)
- [Working Effectively with Legacy
  Code](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/44919.Working_Effectively_with_Legacy_Code)
  (2004) by Michael Feathers is the standard work on refactoring legacy code.
  Even after 17 years, it is still relevant for the problems we run into today.

<aside>
  <h3>Seeing your systems through a Hexagonal lens</h3>
  <p>Making informed architecture decisions across your application landscape is a tough skill. We can support you with for instance architecture reviews, carrying out experiments and facilitating collaborative architecture sessions.</p>
  <p><div>
    <a href="/consulting">Learn more about our consultancy services</a>
  </div></p>
</aside>

Commit message:

Some edits and an expansion for uuids.

_drafts/wrapping-dates-logging-uuids.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: Wrapping dates, logging and UUIDs in concepts of their own
tags:
  - architecture
  - design
author: Marc Evers
image: /attachments/blogposts/2021/wrapping-ids-hexagonal.jpg
---

In our previous post on [Hexagonal Architecture in a
back-end](/2021/01/04/hexagonal-backend-example.html), we mentioned wrapping ID
generation and timestamps in concepts of their own. This might feel a bit
over-designed, but we have reasons to do so. In this post,
we share the trade-offs and rationale behind wrapping the standard stuff
in abstractions of your own.

- [Forces](#forces)
- [It hurts when writing unit tests](#it-hurts-when-writing-unit-tests)
- [Standard stuff is stable...until it changes](#standard-stuff-is-stableuntil-it-changes)
- [Standard stuff does the job...but does it communicate?](#standard-stuff-does-the-jobbut-does-it-communicate)
- [Standard stuff offers all you need...and so much more](#standard-stuff-offers-all-you-needand-so-much-more)
- [Introduce a seam?](#introduce-a-seam)
- [Resolution: thinking from the domain](#resolution-thinking-from-the-domain)
- [Example: timestamps](#example-timestamps)
- [Example: IDs and ID Generator](#example-ids-and-id-generator)
- [Consequences](#consequences)
- [Considerations](#considerations)
- [References](#references)

## Context

When we find ourselves using primitive types like integers, strings, and lists
to represent something, we call this [Primitive
Obsession](https://www.thecodebuzz.com/awesome-code-primitive-obsession-code-smell-with-example/)
and we start looking for the hidden abstractions behind these primitive types.
Our code makes assumptions about what the integer or string means, and those
assumptions are spread out over the code, making it hard to change. 

If we represent monetary amounts by integers for instance, we need to know how
it works in every location where those integers are used. Is it cents, euros, dollars?

We tend to take a similar approach with other standard language or standard
library things, like dates, timestamps, logging, UUIDs. Most developers
just use these things in their code. They are standard, stable, why would you
put extra boilerplate around those?

We have run into a number of issues that make us encapsulate the standard,
stable things as well, rather than include them everywhere in our code.

## It hurts when writing unit tests

If an object under test generates a timestamp, we cannot do an assert on the
whole object, because the timestamps will differ. We can assert the
individual attributes except the timestamp, but this makes our test long and
unreadable. We can assert the approximate timestamp, but this makes the test
even more obscure.

```python
class Token:
  def __init__(self, token):
    self._token = token
    self._created_time = datetime.now()

def test_initial_token_is_valid():
  token = Token('1234')
  assert token == ???   # how to test this?
```

It hurts even more when the code under test generates a UUID as a unique
identifier. We have to work around that in our test.

```python
class DiagnosticSessionCreator:
  def create_with_id(self, team):
    return DiagnosticSession(id=uuid.uuid4(), team=team)

def test_creates_valid_diagnostic_session():
  creator = DiagnosticSessionCreator()
  session = creator.create_with_id(team='Team A')
  assert token == ???   # how to test this?
```

When testing code that creates a timestamp or an UUID, we could create a
_seam_ in the production code so that we have control over timestamp/UUID
creation. In our test, we'd like to influence the line of code where the
timestamp or UUID is created, to make it more deterministic.

> _Seam_ is a concept from Working Effectively with Legacy Code book by [Michael
> Feathers](https://twitter.com/mfeathers), the classic book on handling legacy
> code and getting your first test in. A seam is a place in the code where you
> would like to vary behaviour, without having to change that code. You want to
> be able to vary the behaviour from the test.

The refactoring techniques from the Working Effectively with Legacy Code book,
like extracting a creation method, are good techniques when dealing with legacy
code (i.e. code without tests), but they do not necessarily make the code better - _sometimes it gets worse before it gets better_ is the legacy code adage. 

## Standard stuff is stable...until it changes

The standard language and library constructs tend to be pretty stable, but still
their APIs sometimes changes. Alternatively, you grow dissatisfied with your
current logging library and decide this new library does the job better, faster,
etc.

Having dependencies on the standard library all over the place will turn this
into a migration nightmare. The standard stuff doesn't change that much, but if
it does it hurts.

## Standard stuff does the job...but does it communicate?

The standard library names might be close to what we are trying to express in
our domain, but usually there is a gap. 

An example: imagine we have some sort of token that is valid for 60 minutes and
we need to check if it is expired. We compare its timestamp plus 60 minutes
to the current time:

```python
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

class Token:
  EXPIRY_IN_MINUTES=60

  def __init__(self, token):
    self._token = token
    self._created_time = datetime.now()

  # how to test this function?
  def is_expired(self):
    return self._created_time + timedelta(minutes=Token.EXPIRY_IN_MINUTES) < datetime.now()
```

For us the code in `is_expired` is not obvious at first glance. We always make
mistakes with the  greater than/less then operators, and fortunately our unit
tests will save us. This piece of code does not express clearly the intent of
timestamps in our code.

## Standard stuff offers all you need...and so much more

Python `datetime` objects offer all kinds of methods, like `isoweekday`,
`replace`, `-` and we don't need all of those for representing timestamps. For
tokens that expire, we only need to compare, add a time
delta and maybe convert them to and from strings (serialization).

Using an interface that is way broader than what the concept it is representing
needs, creates an [affordance](https://jnd.org/affordances_and_design/) for
using the other stuff when it seems convenient, without having to think hard
about the intent.


## Resolution: thinking from the domain

As a response to the issues mentioned above, we prefer to approach this from a
domain oriented perspective, especially when we are test driving the code.

From our domain, we see the need for a timestamp or a unique identifier. The
`datetime` object or the UUID value are mere implementation details. Our
domain cares about uniqueness of identifiers, not about UUIDs.

So we introduce a small domain concept representing the 'thing' we are dealing with, like a unique identifier. Introducing a domain concept means:
- Thinking about an **intention-revealing, domain-oriented name** for the thing.
- Thinking about the **interface** of the thing: what services does our domain need from this thing?

We encapsulate the knowledge around a timestamp or identifier in a type or class
of its own. We can express more meaning in the code in that way and make the
code better maintainable. This domain focus helps us to get to the core of the
'thing', instead of being guided by the peculiarities of the libraries at hand.

## Example: timestamps

To work more effectively with timestamps, we can introduce a `Clock` class with
a `now` function to return the current time. For testing, we create a
`FixedClock` with the same interface that always returns a stubbed timestamp.

```python
class Clock:
    def now(self):
        return datetime.now(timezone.utc) 

class FixedClock:
    def __init__(self, the_time=datetime.now(timezone.utc)):
        self._the_time = the_time

    def now(self):
        return self._the_time 
```
In Java or C#, we'd create a Clock interface with SystemClock and FixedClock
implementations.

As a next step, we can wrap the `datetime` object in a Timestamp class:

```python
class Timestamp:
    def __init__(self, timestamp):
        self._timestamp = timestamp
    ...

class Clock:
    def now(self):
        return Timestamp(datetime.now(timezone.utc))
```

The Timestamp class expresses the responsibilities of a Timestamp in
this specific domain, and no more. We cannot accidentally and implicitly
introduce a new timestamp responsibility.

There are more reasons to wrap date/time related behaviour in an abstraction of
its own. It provides a place to handle time zone related logic. Even more so
once you realize that UTC and time zones [have some interesting
properties](https://codeblog.jonskeet.uk/2019/03/27/storing-utc-is-not-a-silver-bullet/).

## Example: unique identifiers

We use UUIDs as unique identifiers for our objects. Testing creation logic
that assigns a new id is hard because the UUIDs are not predictable. So we
introduce an `ID` concept and an `IDGenerator`. 

```python
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class ID:
    _uuid: UUID

    @staticmethod
    def from_string(potential_uuid_value):
        ...
        try:
            return ID(UUID(potential_uuid_value))
        except ValueError as e:
            return InvalidID()

    @staticmethod
    def invalid():
        return InvalidID()
    ...
    def __str__(self):
        return str(self._uuid)

class IDGenerator(object):
    def generate_id(self):
        return ID(uuid.uuid4())
```

The `IDGenerator` gets injected in the creation code, here is an example from the Online Agile Fluency Diagnostic application:

```python
class DiagnosticSessionCreator:
    def __init__(self, id_generator=IDGenerator(), ...):
        self.id_generator=id_generator
    ...
    def create_with_id(self, ...):
        ...
        diagnostic_session=DiagnosticSession(id=self.id_generator.generate_id(), ...)
```

This allows us to introduce a `FixedIDGeneratorGenerating` subclass of
`IDGenerator`  which always returns the same stubbed ID:

```python
class TestCreateWithId:
  def test_creates_a_diagnostic_session_with_a_generated_id(self):
    id_generator = FixedIDGeneratorGenerating(aValidID('12'))
    creator = DiagnosticSessionCreator(id_generator=id_generator, ...)
    diagnostic_session = creator.create_with_id(...)
    assert diagnostic_session.id == aValidID('12')
```

The `aValidID` function is a [test data builder](/2020/10/09/test-data-builders.html) for IDs. We have published
the ID, IDGenerator and corresponding test data builder as part of the
[quiltz-domain library on GitHub](https://github.com/qwaneu/quiltz-domain).

> We introduced the IDGenerator early on in the project so that we'd be in
> control of id generation in our tests. Later on, we decided to introduce the
> ID concept to represent identifiers, but also _invalid_ identifiers - incoming
> data in a web application could be invalid and we want to be able to work with
> invalid data conveniently. We found out the hard way that we had waited too
> long with introducing the ID class, because UUIDs were all over the place. It
> took us a few hours to refactor.

Narrator: "If you leave this for a few years, it may be hard to recover from, and repeatedly lead to surprisingly interesting defects. For instance, when over time you use different frameworks that generate different shapes of UUID's and handle them as strings everytwhere".

## Consequences

If we wrap standard language and library primitives in meaningful abstractions
of their own, we see the following benefits:

- **Code reflects our intent better** and gets less cluttered by language or
  standard library constructs.
- **Code becomes better testable**, as we have more behaviour under control.
- We explicitly **document what we use** from the standard library and we
  **insulate ourselves from changes** in these dependencies. This lowers the
  cost of testing and replacing them when necessary.

Seen through a [Hexagonal Architecture](/2020/08/20/hexagonal-architecture.html)
lens, we see standard library stuff as external dependencies that we want to
separate from our domain. The implementations of our `Clock` and `IDGenerator`
can be seen as _adapters_. This is in line with the Hexagonal Architecture
principle of **domain in the centre, libraries & frameworks on the outside**.

![Wrapping standard library things seen through a hexagonal architecture lens](/attachments/blogposts/2021/wrapping-ids-hexagonal.jpg)

It feels like extra work, not adding much value initially when the codebase is
still small and innocent. But the extra effort is limited and will save you
hours later on.

## Considerations

Initially, it feels like overkill to wrap stable, well-known, relatively simple
standard library constructs in abstractions of their own. So we sometimes start
out with directly using the library within our domain code. We tolerate
libraries, as they are not in control and are less intrusive than frameworks. We
wrap them later on when we notice logic growing around the use of that library.
The longer we wait however, the more painful it becomes. 

With this approach, we are not testing the actual timestamp or UUID generation
in our unit tests. That's ok, we do not need to test standard library behaviour.
We trust it to do its job correctly. Even if we wouldn't trust it, we would
write a few specific _characterization tests_ to capture its behaviour. These
can be useful to 'fix' the behaviour and get early feedback if a newer version
subtly breaks the API.

Creating small, domain-oriented abstractions around standard library primitives
creates a new home for responsibilities. This helps in the quest of [What To
Put Where](/2020/12/23/what-to-put-where.html).

## References

- If you'd like to learn the vocabulary of code smells like Primitive Obsession
  and appropriate refactorings, have a look at our [Code Smells & Refactoring
  cards](/shop)
- The concept of [Connascence](https://connascence.io/), a model for reasoning
  about coupling in code, provides a foundation for wrapping standard
  library things in your own abstractions
- Read more about the Hexagonal Architecture pattern in [our series of posts on this topic](/2020/08/20/hexagonal-architecture.html)
- [Working Effectively with Legacy
  Code](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/44919.Working_Effectively_with_Legacy_Code)
  (2004) by Michael Feathers is the standard work on refactoring legacy code.
  Even after 17 years, it is still relevant for the problems we run into today.

<aside>
  <h3>Seeing your systems through a Hexagonal lens</h3>
  <p>Making informed architecture decisions across your application landscape is a tough skill. We can support you with for instance architecture reviews, carrying out experiments and facilitating collaborative architecture sessions.</p>
  <p><div>
    <a href="/consulting">Learn more about our consultancy services</a>
  </div></p>
</aside>
